Module 2 (SB 1.10-19)

-----

Section I

1. Summarize the talks of the Dvaraka-vasis from 1.11.6-10.

Mood of separation and welcoming reunion. Reciprocation. Affection. Shelter.

Ultimate rest, supreme transcendental Lord, inevitable time cannot influence,
worshiped by all demigods.

Creator of the universe, mother, well-wisher, Lord, father, spiritual master
and worshipable Deity. Footsteps. Success.

Protecting, face full of affectionate glances, full of all auspiciousness
transcendental form.

Lotus-eyed, every absent moment seems like millions of years, infallible, eyes
become useless, as if bereft of sun.

Master, attractive face, smiles vanquish all sufferings, if abroad cannot look
at. Upon hearing their speeches, entered Dvārakā and acknowledged all greetings
by casting His transcendental glance over them.

--

2. Write a brief note on “devotees are holy places personified.” (1.13.10)

Carry the Lord's holy feet in heart, wherever traveling. Lord's omnipresence
perceived and manifested by unalloyed devotees, as electricity in electric
bulb. Visits tirthas to purify them.

Holy places all over the earth meant for purifying the polluted consciousness   
of the human being by an atmosphere surcharged with the presence of the Lord’s  
unalloyed devotees.

Pure devotees hear from the authorities, chant, sing and write of the Lord's
glories. Convert dirty into holy places. Holy places worth the name only on their account. Pure devotees rectify the accumulated sins of any place. 

Prabhupada paraphrasing BRS 01.01.011 anyabhilasita-sunyam.

Example: Vidura

--

3. List any 6 bad omens seen by Yudhisthira. (1.14.11-20)

Body: left side (thighs, arms, eyes) quivering, heart palpitations due to fear.

Animals: she-jackal cries at the rising sun and vomits fire, dog barks
fearlessly, lower animals like asses circumambulating, horses weeping.

Birds: Pigeon like death messenger, shrieks of the owls and their rival crows make hearts tremble, wanting to make a void of the whole universe.

Panca-bhutas: Smoke encircles the sky, earth and mountains throbbing, cloudless
thunder, bolts from the blue. wind blows violently, blasting dust everywhere,
creating darkness. Clouds raining everywhere with bloody disasters. Sun rays
declining, stars fighting amongst themselves. Confused living entities ablaze
and weeping. Rivers, tributaries, ponds, reservoirs and mind all perturbed.
Butter no longer ignites fire.

Cattles: cows passing, calves not sucking cow teats, cows not giving milk,
standing, crying, tears in their eyes, bulls taking no pleasure in the
pasturing grounds.

Deities: crying in the temple, lamenting and perspiring. About to leave. 

Places: cities, villages, towns, gardens, mines and hermitages devoid of beauty
and bereft of all happiness.

--

4. Explain how the knowledge of Bhagavad-gita is applicable in all
circumstances. (1.15.27 P)

Relief from burning heart. Prepared for the less intelligent class like us.

Not only for solace from all kinds of mental agonies, but also for the way out
of great entanglements which may embarrass one in some critical hour. Authentic
scriptural sound representation and incarnation of the Lord. Eradicates
illusion. Faithful human being desirous of being liberated from the clutches of
material existence can very easily take advantage.

Begins with life problems discriminating the soul from the material elements,
proves by all reason and argument that the soul is indestructible in all
circumstances and that the outer covering of matter, the body and the mind,
change for another term of material existence, full of miseries. Bhagavad-gītā
meant for terminating all different types of miseries under all circumstances.

--

5. Describes various aspects of Krsña’s beautiful form with analogies and the
effect of seeing it.

Smiling face, full of affectionate glances and auspiciousness.

Lotus-eyed, eyes useless if bereft of sun. Darkness. Illusion.

1.11.10

Attractive face, smiles vanquish all sufferings. Transcendental glance.

Once attracted, cannot tolerate separation. Eternally related, as sun rays with
the sun disc. Sun rays molecular parts of the solar radiation. Sun and rays
cannot be separated. Separation by cloud, temporary and artificial, when cloud
cleared, sun rays display natural effulgence in the presence of the sun.

Similarly, living entities, molecular parts of the whole spirit, separated from
the Lord by the artificial covering curtain of māyā, illusory energy. To be
removed, then living entity can see the Lord face to face, all miseries
removed.

No satiation in desiring to see the Lord. Law of satiation acts materially, but
no scope for it in the spiritual realm. Never under the laws of the material
modes. His body, source of everything that be, reservoir of all beauties beyond
our experience.

1.11.26

Chest: abode of the goddess of fortune
Moonlike face: drinking vessel for eyes hankering after all that is beautiful
Arms: resting places for the administrative demigods
Lotus feet: refuge of pure devotees

Goddesses of fortune can be seen automatically if attracted by the bodily
features. Beautiful face for complete satisfaction. Smile, beautiful nature.
Lotus, kind of honey, transcendentally relished by the devotees. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī song. Devotees satisfied at His lotus feet. No ambition to see His
all-beautiful face or aspire for the protection of the strong arms.

--

6. Write a brief note on forbearance of a devotee.

Like Earth. Lord's plan for a higher goal. Accept challenges, calamities and
reversals as blessings bringing us closer to Krishna.

Even though defamed, cheated, cursed, disturbed, neglected or even killed,
never inclined to avenge themselves. Devotee callous about worldly advantages
or reverses not caring for retaliating and self-preservation to nullify. More
powerful than brahmanas, never misusing that power for personal benefit.
Utilising in Krishna's and devotees' service. Deatched from the body. Surrender
to Krishna. Great character receiving Krishna's will as it is, allowing Krishna
raise in our life. If against Krishna and vaishnavas, take very strong action.
Do not allow exploitation though.

Example: Pariksit unafraid of snake bird biting.

--

7. Why were the talks of the ladies of Hastinapura more attractive than Vedic
hymns? (1.10.20-30)

Language immaterial, subject matter important. E.g. Ṭhākura Viśvanātha
Cakravartī approved Ṭhākura Narottama dāsa's songs. Ladies absorbed in the
Lord's thought and actions, developed the consciousness of Vedic wisdom by
Lord's grace. Although might not have been very learned scholars in Sanskrit or
otherwise, still more attractive than the Vedic hymns. The Vedic hymns in the
Upaniṣads sometimes indirect, but the talks of the ladies were directly spoken
of the Lord, thus more pleasing to the heart. More valuable than the learned
brāhmaṇas’ benedictions.

--

8. What unwanted qualities destroy the four legs of dharma? (1.17.17-27)

Three legs broken due to rampant irreligion. Moths captivated by the glaring
brightness of light, become prey to the fire. Similarly, deluding energy
always captivating conditioned souls to become prey to the fire of delusion.
Surrender possible by persons of austerity, cleanliness, mercy and
truthfulness. Gradually, curtailed by proportionate development of pride,
attachment for women and intoxication.

By the influence of the Age of Kali, even paupers proud of their penny. Women
dressed in an overly attractive fashion to victimize the minds of men. Men
addicted to drinking wine, smoking, drinking tea and chewing tobacco, etc. Root
causes of all irreligiosities. Not possible to check corruption, bribery and
nepotism.

False pride, too high an estimation of one’s own values of life, undue
attachment to women or association with them, intoxication divert human
civilization from the path of peace, however much the people clamor for peace
in the world.

--

9. Write a brief note on forbearance of a devotee.

Duplicate, see 6.

--

10. What is the glory of association of devotees?

Lord's Devotee not liking to associate with nondevotees. Birds of the same
feather mix together.

1.16.6-9
1.18.11-19
1.19.8- (1.19.16)

1.18.13

The value of a moment’s association with the Lord's devotees cannot even be
compared to the attainment of heavenly planets or liberation from matter, what
to speak of worldly benedictions in the form of material prosperity, which
are for those who are meant for death. In the material world, association with
gross materialists veritably condemned, yoṣit-saṅgī, much attached to material
entanglement (women and other paraphernalia). Conditioned because drives away
the benedictions of life and prosperity. Opposite bhāgavata-saṅgī, always in
the association with the Lord’s name, form, qualities, devotees, etc. Such
association is always desirable, worshipable, praiseworthy, Accept it as the
highest goal of life. "sravanam kirtanam vishno smaranam", etc, in devotee
assocation to always remember Krishna. Spiritual connection. If one wants to
become a doctor, one associated with doctors. If one wants to go back home back
to Godhead, one associated with devotees.

-----

Section II

1. Write a brief note on the relationship between Krsña and His queens based on
relevant verses and purports.

1.11.28-39

16108 transcendental wives. For each, fully equipped palace complete with
necessary compounds and gardens. Full description, 10th Canto.

Queens rejoiced within their minds to see their husband home after a long
period abroad. Got up at once from their seats and meditations. As socially
customary, covered their faces shyly and looked about coyly. Lord at once
expanded Himself in as many plenary expansions as queens and palaces, entered
in each simultaneously and separately, vaibhava.

Queens, expansions of His internal potency. Potent and potencies perpetually
exchanging transcendental pleasures, Lord's pastimes. Queens, all in
meditation, thinking of Krishna's absence, always meditating upon Him. Cannot
live for a moment without meditating on Him. Goddesses of fortune.

Never separated from Krishna, either by presence or trance. Prime state of
ecstasy annihilated all other formalities and social conventions, escaped all
stumbling blocks on the path of meeting Krishna.

Embraced Krishna in the innermost recesses of their hearts, visually, sent
their sons to embrace, equal to personal embracing. Tried to restrain their
feelings, but inadvertently shed tears. Conjugal relation.

By nature always restless and moving, could not quit the Lord’s feet. Cannot
quit the Lord for a moment. Relation spiritual, so enlivening and resourceful.
Not mundane affair and sex relation. Not false indefatigable attraction. Not
ordinary women, but result of many millions of births’ tapasya, perfection of
devotional service.

Queens’ beautiful smiles, furtive glances, all spotless and exciting. Conquer
Cupid by making him give up his bow in frustration, even the tolerant Śiva
could fall victim, still, despite all their magical feats and attractions,
could not agitate Krishna's senses. Not satisfy Krishna by their feminine
attractiveness, but sincere affection and unalloyed transcendental loving
service.

Simple and delicate, unaware of the extent of the glories of their husband,
thinking henpecked. Yet, no material contamination.

--

2. Summarize the instructions of Vidura to Dhṛtarāṣṭra.

Dhṛtarāṣṭra wanted to remain as king, being the eldest uncle of Yudhiṣṭhira.
Get out of here immediately without delay. Fear overtaken you. Cruel death
cares for none. No remedial measure for impending fear of death and frightful
situation. Time, kala, forces everyone to surrender everything, even most dear
life. All relatives died, father, brother, well-wishers and sons.

Yudhiṣṭhira, as matter of duty, maintained Dhṛtarāṣṭra in royal honor.
Dhṛtarāṣṭra happily passing away his numbered days in the illusion of a king or
the royal uncle of Yudhiṣṭhira. Vidura, as a saint and duty-bound affectionate
youngest brother, awakened Dhṛtarāṣṭra from his slumber of disease and old age.
Reminded of this false position.

No superior power can check the cruel hands of death. Hiranyakasipu also failed
to become immortal. A great Indian scientist had to surrender life, wife,
children, house, land, wealth. Same at Pakistan and Hindustan division.

Old age symptoms. Already blind, now deaf, memory shortened, teeth loose,
intelligence disturbed, liver defective and cough mucus. Degraded life.
Expended major portion of life, body overtaken by invalidity. Living in
another's home. Vidura pointed out that everyone has to protect himself by
action and Krishna's grace. Execute duty faithfully, depending for the result
on the supreme authority. No one can protect others unprotected by Krishna.

Risking humiliation, living like Bhima's household dog eating remnants, who
killed his two sons. No need to live on the charity of those whom you tried to
kill by arson and poisoning. Also insulted their married wife and usurped their
kingdom and wealth. Analogy, today's politicians not retiring. Despite your
unwillingness, death is approaching his miserly body. Must prepare for
inevitable death.

Dhira, undisturbed, goes to an unknwon remote place, freed from all
obligations, quits his body when becoming useless. Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura song.
One can compensate for a life of frustration by becoming a dhīra. Advised by
Vidura at least to become a dhīra by his grace. Leave for the north without
delay before Kali-yuga approached.

Narottama, understands the falsity and misery of this world, leaves home,
depends fully on Krishna. Vidura. Not possible for any ordinary man.

--

3. List the 10 causes of Arjuna’s dejection.

1.14.39-44

Health alright? Bereft of bodily luster.

Disrespected or neglected because of your long stay at Dvārakā?

Unfriendly words or hreatened?

Failed to give charity to who asked? Couldn't keep the promise to someone?

kṣatriya sometimes visited by persons in need of money. When asked for
donation, duty of the possessor of wealth to provide charity. If fails to
comply with obligations, very sorry for discrepancy. Similarly, should not fail
to keep promise to provide charity. These discrepancies sometimes cause
despondency, subjected to criticism, might be the cause of plight.

Couldn't give shelter to deserving?

Brāhmaṇas, engaged in researching knowledge for the society’s welfare, both
materially and spiritually, deserve the king's protection king in all respects.
Similarly, children, cows, diseased persons, women, old men specifically
require state or ksatriya king protection. If not getting, shameful.
Yudhiṣṭhira anxious to know about these discrepancies.

Contacted women of impeachable character?

Free contact between man and woman only allowed in certain conditions.

Not properly treated deserving women?

Women approaching men for contact should never be refused. At the same time
discretion considered. E.g. Bhima by Hiḍimbī, Yayāti refused to marry daughter
of brahmana Śukrācārya. Vyāsadeva, brāhmaṇa, called to beget Pāṇḍu and
Dhṛtarāṣṭra. Satyavatī belonged to family of fishermen, Parāśara, great
brāhmaṇa, begot in her Vyāsadeva. Not abominable examples.

Defeated by someone inferior or equal?

Abominable for kṣatriyas to be defeated by inferior or equal in strength. If
defeated at all, should be defeated by some superior power. Bhīṣmadeva superior
to Arjuna in all ways, age, respect and strength. Karṇa equal to Arjuna, so
killed even by crooked means.

Failed to take care of old men and boys?
Committed some unpardonable mistake?

Householder duty to feed first of all the children, old family members,
brāhmaṇas and invalids. Required to call thrice on the road for any unknown
hungry man to come and dine before taking meal. Neglect of this prescribed
duty, unpardonable.

Feeling empty because might have lost most intimate friend, Krishna?

Obliged to inquire frankly on Nārada’s indication.

--

4. Summarize Arjuna’s feelings of separation from Krsña.

1.15.1-6

Kṛṣṇa's celebrated friend, griefstricken because of his strong feeling of
separation from Kṛṣṇa. Too much aggrieved, choked up. Impossible to reply
properly to the various speculative inquiries.

Due to grief, mouth and lotuslike heart dried up. Body lost all luster.
Remembering Krishna, could hardly utter a word in reply.

With great difficulty, checked the tears of grief smearing his eyes. Very
distressed because Kṛṣṇa out of his sight, increasingly felt affection for Him.

Remembering Kṛṣṇa, His well-wishes, chariot-driving, benefactions, intimate
familial relations, overwhelmed and breathing very heavily, began to speak.

Arjuna, one of the typical pure devotees, reciprocating in the fraternal
relationship. Lord’s dealings display of friendship of the highest perfect
order. Not only a well-wisher, but actually a benefactor. Lord even tied him
into family relationship by arranging Subhadrā’s marriage.

Lord became a chariot driver to protect Arjuna from warfare risks, became
happy after establishing the Pāṇḍavas to rule over the world. Arjuna remembered
all these one after another, thus became overwhelmed with such thoughts.

Recalls experiences. Intimate friend has left him alone. Astounding power,
astonishing even demigods, no longer with him. Sane man obliged to Krishna for
such benefactions, utilize such power for the service of Krishna. Lost Him,
separation for a moment renders all the universes unfavorable and void, like
bodies without life. Lord, summum bonum, vital principle of everything.

--

5. What are the various possible reasons, mentioned by Dharma, for Dharani’s
lamentation?

1.16.18-24

Internal disease or distant friend?

Kali-yuga, everyone diseased with ailment, feels relatives' absence away from
home. No family blessed to live together. To earn livelihood, fathers live at
places far away from sons, wives from husbands, etc. Sufferings from internal
diseases, separation from near and dear, anxieties for maintaining the status
quo. important factors making today's people always unhappy.

I lost 3 legs? Standing only on one.
Exploitation of meat eaters? Unlawful meat-eaters.
Demigods bereft of sacrificial offerings? No sacrifices performed currently.
Sufferings of others? Famine and drought.

Duration of life, mercy, power of recollection, moral or religious principles
gradually diminish. Dharma, principles of religion, lost in the proportion of
three out of four, symbolic bull standing only on one leg. Hell for animals.
Meat-eaters, mlecchas, without restriction and scriptural injuction,
slaughterhouses, exploit bull and cow bodies. System of performing sacrifice
created by Brahma. Necessary for rain, grain, grass, etc. Only means to get
free from the reaction of all sins. Caitanya, saṅkīrtana-yajña.

Compuction for unhappy women and children? Left forlorn by unscrupulous persons.
Mishandled goddess of learning? Addicted to acts against the principles of
religion.
Disrespectful brahmanas? Towards brahmanical culture.

Women, children, brahmanas, cows, grossly neglected, left unprotected. Uncared
for. women become independent of men's protection, feminism. Administrative
heads condemn Vedic widom tenets, conduct so-called secular states, brāhmaṇas
purchased by unscrupulous administrators.

Administration disorders?
Unrestricted people?

General populace not following rules and regulations for eating, sleeping,
drinking, mating, etc., perform such anywhere, dog can mate with a bitch before
public eyes without hesitation, if human being so, considered public nuisance,
criminally prosecuted. Beastly behavior. Ajamila story. Poor innocent students,
daily cinema victims attracting men only for sex indulgence. Untrained
ksatriyas. Regrettable topsy-turvy.

Lord's absence?

Bereft of Hari's presence. Cannot mercifully unload heavy burden, cement the
path of liberation. Krishna's activities no longer relishable. Time has taken
away your fortune.

--

6. What were the questions of Pariksit Maharaja to the sages assembled on the
bank of the Ganges?

--

7. Write a short note on the characters of Sringi & Samika.
 
-----

Section III

1. Write the salient features of Narada’s talk to Yudhisthira Maharaja to
overcome lamentation.

--

2. How did Pariksit inquire to the cow and the bull about the perpetrator? What
comments does Srila Prabhupada give on those inquiries?

--

3. What was Pariksit’s response on receiving the news of Sringi’s curse?
Elaborate. Why didn’t he beg forgiveness from Samika?

--

4. Write a brief note on the character of Pariksit Maharaja.

