Module 1 (SB 1.1-9)

-----

Section I

1. Write the 7 characteristics of the Absolute Truth based on 1.1.1.

  1. Primeval cause
    Of all causes of the creation, sustenance and destruction of the manifested universes.
  2. Cognizant
    Directly and indirectly conscious of all manifestations, minute details.
  3. Independent
    No other cause beyond Him.
  4. Enlightener
    First imparted the Vedic knowledge unto the heart of Brahmājī, the original living being.
  5. Bewilderer
    By Him even the great sages and demigods are placed into illusion, as one is bewildered by the illusory representations of water seen in fire, or land seen on water.
  6. Factual basis
    Only because of Him do the material universes, temporarily manifested by the reactions of the three modes of nature, appear factual, although they are unreal.
  7. Eternal abode
    Eternally existent in the transcendental abode, which is forever free from the illusory representations of the material world.

--

2. Write the 6 questions of the sages of Naimiñäraëya.

  1.1.9 What is the absolute and ultimate good for the people in general?
  1.1.11 What is the essence of all scriptures?
  1.1.12 What is the purpose the Personality of Godhead appeared in the womb of Devakī as the son of Vasudeva?
  1.1.17 What are the adventures He performs in His various incarnations (purusa avataras)?
  1.1.18 What are the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Godhead’s multi-incarnations (lila avataras)?
  1.1.23 To whom the religious principles, dharma, have after Krishna's departure gone for shelter?

--

3. Write a brief note on the qualities of Kali-yuga people.

  1. Short lives, ālpāyuṣaḥ, ~100 years. Not so much because of insufficient food but because of irregular habits. Overeating, over-sense gratification, overdependence on another’s mercy, and artificial standards of living.
  2. Quarrelsome, kalau. Constant strain of hot and cold wars, e.g. Ukraine.
  3. Lazy, mandāḥ. Not only materially but in the matter of self-realization. Bad system of education no desire for self-realization.
  4. Misguided, sumanda-matayaḥ. victims of misguided teachers.
  5. Unlucky, manda-bhāgyāḥ. victims not only of different political creeds and parties, but also of many different types of sense gratificatory diversions, such as cinemas, sports, gambling, clubs, mundane libraries, bad association, smoking, drinking, cheating, pilfering, bickerings and so on.
  6. Disturbed, upadrutāḥ. Full of anxieties due to so many different engagements.

--

4. How does Srila Prabhupada explain “personal realization” in his purport to 1.4.1.

No bypassing, out of vanity, to attempt to show one’s own learning by trying to surpass the previous ācārya. Full confidence in the previous ācārya, realize the subject matter so nicely to present the matter for the particular circumstances and understanding of the audience in a suitable and interesting manner. Original text purpose maintained. No obscure meaning screwed out of it. Like Suta Goswami received it from Sukadeva Goswami and passed unto the rsis headed by Śrī Śaunaka Ṛṣi.

--

5. Summarize Arjuna’s prayers to Krishna in 1.7.

(from about min 28 in the corresponding lecture)

  1.7.22 Ultimate shelter. Krishna removes fearlessness, beyond material existence, not in dark well. Can pull out of material existence. Protection.

  1.7.23 Transcendental. To material energy. Original person. Not just cousin and friend. Cast away material energy by internal potency. Cannot effect him. Krishna-sun, maya-darkness. Light of sun vanishes the darkness/ignorance.

  1.7.24 Most merciful. Descends to reclaim the fallen conditioned souls. Eradicates false sense enjoyment, teaches.

  1.7.25 Reason for descent. Remove the burden of the world and to benefit His friends and devotees. Equal to everyone, yet more inclined to His own men and devotees. Equally reciprocates. Like prasadam servers.

  1.7.26 What is this effulgence? Bewildering for Arjuna. Has not started with his need, but deep respective prayers. Like asking for permission for coming in, even though it is ok. Nice and standard manner. No surpass of protocols, formality and rituals even in hurry. Important details. Fine sentiment of a devotee.

--

6. What lessons does Srila Prabhupada give from Bhismadeva’s way of welcoming guests.

1.9.9. There are different climates and situations in different parts of the world, and if one has to discharge his duties to preach the message of the Lord, he must be expert in adjusting things in terms of the time and place (deśa-kāla-vibhāgavit).

Bhishma (dharma-jño) certainly unable at that time to welcome and receive them physically (offering seat, water, washing their feet, etc) because he was neither at his home nor in a normal healthy condition.

But he was quite fit by the activities of his sound mind, and therefore he could utter sweet words with hearty expressions, and all of them were well received. One can perform one’s duty by physical work, by mind and by words.

Like small clay and water deity in the forest instead of metal. Dhruva (SB 4.8). No lack of resource, but maturity and intelligence.

--

7. What are the 2 categories of literature? Explain.

For different types of men of different mentality.

1.5.10 Materialistic ("crows")

Refused remnants of sensuous topics. Mundane talks in relation with the gross
body and subtle mind.

Full of subject matter described in decorative language full of mundane similes
and metaphorical arrangements without Lord's glorification.

Such poetry and prose, on any subject matter, is considered decoration of a
dead body.

Modes of passion and ignorance.

1.5.11 Transcendental ("swans", like Srimad Bhagavatam)

Full of descriptions of the transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms,
pastimes, etc., of the unlimited Supreme Lord.

Full of transcendental words directed toward bringing about a revolution in the
impious lives of this world’s misdirected civilization.

Even though imperfectly composed, are heard, sung and accepted by purified men
who are thoroughly honest.

--

8. What are various occasions when Krsna protected the Pandavas.

1.8.24

  1. Poisoned cake, Bhima.
  2. Great fire, put into the house made of shellac and set afire.
  3. Cannibals, Bhīma's fight with the man-eater demon Hiḍimba Rākṣasa, Lord saved him.
  4. Draupadī dragged out, attempts to insult her by stripping her naked in the vicious assembly of the Kuru. Lord saved her by supplying an immeasurable length of cloth. Duryodhana’s party failed to see her naked.
  5. Exile sufferings
  6. Great Battle of Kurukṣetra, great generals. Arjuna against Droṇa, Bhīṣma and Karṇa, all powerful fighters.
  7. Weapon of Aśvatthāmā, brahmāstra released by Droṇācārya's to kill the child within Uttarā's womb. Lord saved the only surviving descendant of the Kurus, Mahārāja Parīkṣit.

--

9. How did Suta Goswami begin to answer the questions of Naimisaranya sages?

1.2.1   Thanked the perfect inquiries, perfect satisfaction.
1.2.2-3 Obeisances to Sukadeva Goswami, remembering his spiritual master, Bhagavatam speaker, enter the hearts of all, beyond samskaras, all sages' guru, vaishnava from beginning, compassionate, transcendental torchlight, assimilated and cited SB for first time, enable all to cross the material ocean.
1.2.4   Obeisances Nara Narayana rsi, humility, preresiding deity, Badrik ashram, supermost human being, Sarasvati, the goddess of learning, Vyasadeva, sage author.
1.2.5   Appreciating perfect questions. Birds, students, business men, lawyers, etc, are full of questions, but sages's questions relate to Lord Kṛṣṇa, world’s welfare, capable of completely satisfying the self.

--

10. What reasons did Krishna give to inspire Arjuna to kill Asvatthama at once?
a
  1.7.35 Brahma bandhu, relative. Brahmana by birth, not qualification. Like high court judge 's son.
  1.7.36 Violated codes of religious war for whimsical sense gratification. Killed innocent boys in their sleep. Not to kill a careless, intoxicated, insane, asleep, afraid or devoid of his chariot enemy. Nor boy, woman, foolish creature or surrendered soul.
  1.7.37 Exists at others' cost. Killing is for his benefit. Next life, no suffering for murder, not going to hell. Life for a life death sentence purifies his sins, eligible for promotion to heavenly planets.
  1.7.38 Promise to Draupadi. Bring the head of her sons' killer.
  1.7.39 Murdered and dissatisfied his master, Droṇācārya respected by Pandavas, but his son murdered - śāstras, attacks without notice, kills from behind, sets fire to another’s house, kidnaps one’s wife, condemned to death.


-----

Section II

1. How did Suta Gosvami answer the sages’ Q1 and Q2?

(Q1: 1.1.9 What is the absolute and ultimate good for the people in general?
 Q2: 1.1.11 What is the essence of all scriptures?)

A1: To develop love of God through Bhakti (1.2.6-7)
A2: Devotional service (1.2)

From 1.2.6, Supreme, superior quality of, occupation that completely satisfies
the self - uninterrupted and unmotivated loving devotional service unto the
transcendent Supreme Lord, leading one to eternal, blissful and all-cognizant
life. Like Prahlada Maharaja. Actual life is brahma-bhūta spiritual existence.
Must be pure in quality, i.e., without the least desire and tinge of
unnecessary desire, fruitive action and philosophical speculation for material
enjoyment. Alone leads one to perpetual solace in Krishna's service. Living
being’s sustenance of existence is to coordinate his activities with his
eternal relation with the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, central pivot of living beings.
Bhakti, topmost of all transcendental activities, simultaneously sublime and
easy. Great science, open for all living beings, including the śūdras, vaiśyas,
women, even those lower than the lowborn śūdras, high-class men like qualified
brāhmaṇas, reat self-realized kings. Principles of knowledge and detachment.
Positive service to the realised positive form. Occupational engagements
evoking our divine consciousness. Hearing and chanting the transcendental
message of Godhead. Inquiry Krishna. Both subject and object. Satisfy the
senses only insomuch as required for self-preservation. Aural reception of the
Vedānta-śruti. Maintaining healthy life. One pointed attention. Cut Karmic
knots by remembering Lord. Vasudeva, ultimate goal and liberation. Hear Vedic
literature. Please the Personality of Godhead. Hear, glorify, remember and
worship Him always, without cessation, like the Vrindavana Goswamis.
Varṇāśrama-dharma. Cooperate jointly for the satisfaction of the Supreme Lord.
Serving the servant of God. Fixed in the mode of unalloyed goodness. Reject the
horrible and ghastly forms of the demigods and worship only the all-blissful
forms of Lord Viṣṇu and His plenary portions.

--

2. What are the defects in Vyasadeva’s work that Narada Muni identified?

1.5.8 Insufficient broadcasting Lord's glories.

Lacking sublime and spotless glories of the Personality of Godhead. Completed
many expansions of the Vedic literatures, ending with Vedānta philosophy,
but none of them have written directly glorifying the Personality of Godhead.
Do not have time to even study Prabhupada's bhagavatam. By the time, we come to
a conclusion of the 18 puranas, we become puranas. Dry philosophical
speculations even on the transcendental subject of the Absolute have very
little attraction without directly dealing with the Lord's glorification. The
Personality of Godhead, last word in transcendental realization. Absolute
realized as impersonal Brahman or localized Supersoul, Paramātmā, less
productive of transcendental bliss than the supreme personal realization of His
glories. Arises the necessity of explaining Vedānta-sūtra in the form of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam by the self-same author.

1.5.9 More emphasis on 4 purusharthas.

Not described the glories of the Supreme Personality, Vāsudeva.

The root cause of the despondency of Vyāsadeva, his deliberate avoidance of
glorifying the Lord in his various editions of the Purāṇas. Certainly, as a
matter of course, given descriptions of the glories of the Lord (Śrī
Kṛṣṇa), but not as many as given to religiosity, economic development, sense
gratification and salvation. Mentioned, but not elaborated and repeated upon.
Deficiency. These four items, by far inferior to engagement in the devotional
service of the Lord. instead of giving more importance to the better type of
engagement, namely devotional service to the Lord, he had more or less
improperly used his valuable time, and thus he was despondent. From this it is
clearly indicated that no one can be pleased substantially without being
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord.

To maintain the status quo of the brahma-bhūta stage, as also to increase the
degree of transcendental realization, Nārada recommended Vyāsadeva to now
eagerly and repeatedly describe the path of devotional service curing his gross
despondency.

--

3. WBN on: (i) Krsna’s bhakta-vatsala and (ii) Devotee’s chastity and dependence on Krsna.

(from about 23.15...)

(i) 1.8.11 Very much affectionate towards and lover of His devotees. Born with.

Impartial in every respect, but still inclined towards His devotees because of
great necessity for everyone’s well-being. Pāṇḍava family was a family of
devotees. Lord wanted them to rule the world. Reason He vanquished the rule of
the company of Duryodhana and established the rule of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.
Also wanted to protect Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who was lying in embryo. Did not like
the idea of the world without the Pāṇḍavas, the ideal family of devotees.

1.8.13

No time for the Pāṇḍavas to counteract the brahmāstra of Aśvatthāmā, He took up
His weapon even at the risk of breaking His own vow. Although the Battle of
Kurukṣetra was almost finished, still, according to His vow, He should not have
taken up His own weapon. Emergency was more important than the vow. Preferred
to continue as bhakta-vatsala than to be a worldly moralist never
breaking His solemn vow.

(ii) 1.8.13

Pāṇḍavas cent-percent dependent on the protection of the Lord, although great
warriors.

1.8.17

Kuntī is satī, chaste, due to her unalloyed devotion to Kṛṣṇa. Lord's chaste
devotees not looking to other living beings or demigods, even for deliverance
from danger. Characteristic of the whole family of the Pāṇḍavas. Knew nothing
except Kṛṣṇa, and therefore the Lord was also always ready to help them in all
respects and circumstances. Lord's transcendental nature. Reciprocates the
devotees' dependence. One should not, therefore, look for help from imperfect
living beings or demigods, but all help from Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is competent to
save His devotees. Such a chaste devotee also never asks the Lord for help, but
the Lord, out of His own accord, always anxious to render it.

Bonus beyond 200 words:

1.8.37

Pāṇḍavas most fortunate because with all good luck, entirely dependent on the
Lord's mercy. In the material world, dependent on someone else's mercy is the
utmost sign of misfortune. In our transcendental relation with the Lord, it is
the most fortunate case when we can live completely dependent on Him. Material
disease due to thinking of becoming independent of everything. But the cruel
material nature does not allow us to become independent. The false attempt to
become independent of the stringent laws of nature is known as material
advancement of experimental knowledge. The whole material world is moving on
this false attempt of becoming independent of the laws of nature. Beginning
from Rāvaṇa, who wanted to prepare a direct staircase to the planets of heaven,
down to the present age, they are trying to overcome the laws of nature. They
are trying now to approach distant planetary systems by electronic mechanical
power. But the highest goal of human civilization is to work hard under the
guidance of the Lord and become completely dependent on Him. The highest
achievement of perfect civilization is to work with valor but at the same time
depend completely on the Lord. The Pāṇḍavas were the ideal executors of this
standard of civilization. Undoubtedly they were completely dependent on the
good will of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but they were not idle parasites of the Lord. They
were all highly qualified both by personal character and by physical
activities. Still they always looked for the mercy of the Lord because they
knew that every living being is dependent by constitutional position. The
perfection of life is, therefore, to become dependent on the will of the Lord,
instead of becoming falsely independent in the material world. Those who try to
become falsely independent of the Lord are called anātha, or without any
guardian, whereas those who are completely dependent on the will of the Lord
are called sanātha, or those having someone to protect them. Therefore we must
try to be sanātha so that we can always be protected from the unfavorable
condition of material existence.

It is not only the Pāṇḍavas who were put into the condition of enmity, but all
of us are always in such a condition, and the best way of living is to become
completely dependent on the will of the Lord and thereby overcome all
difficulties of material existence.

--

4. How did the sages glorify the Lord’s holy name and His devotees?

1.1.14 Holy name liberates even by unconscious chanting.

Great asuras, very powerful. living entities, like Rāvaṇa, Hiraṇyakaśipu,
Kaṁsa, and others, all killed by the Personality of Godhead Almighty Vāsudeva
has empowered His name with the powers of His personal Self. Kṛṣṇa's name
feared even by fear personified, nondifferent from Kṛṣṇa. As powerful as Lord
Kṛṣṇa Himself. No difference.

Anyone can take advantage of Sri Krishna's holy names even in the midst of
greatest dangers. Transcendental name. Even though uttered unconsciously, by
force of circumstances, helps one obtain freedom from the hurdle of birth and
death.

1.1.15 Sanctifying power of devotees is greater than Ganges'.

Lord's pure devotees, more powerful than the waters of the sacred river Ganges.
One can derive spiritual benefit out of prolonged use of the Ganges waters. But
one can be sanctified at once by the mercy of Lord's pure devotees.
Representatives of Lord's lotus feet, Prabhupāda and Viṣṇupāda.

Lord's pure devotees honored equally with the Lord because engaged in Lord's
most confidential service, they deliver out of the material world the fallen
souls whom the Lord wants to return home, back to Godhead. Such pure devotees
better known as vice-lords according to revealed scriptures. Pure devotee's
sincere disciple considers the spiritual master equal to the Lord, but always
considers himself to be a humble servant of the servant of the Lord.

--

5. Write a few points about the process of hearing from Bhaktivedanta purports.

(from 31 mins 45 secs)

1.1.3

Mature fruit falls on its own, but not directly from top to bottom as it gets
destroyed. It falls from branch to branch. The fruit is protected from damage.
Through the parampara, disciplic succession. The ripened fruit is not dropped
all of a sudden from the highest planet of Kṛṣṇaloka. Rather, come down
carefully through the chain of disciplic succession without change or
disturbance. Bonafide commentaries revealing itself as it is. One's
responsibility to hear and pass it on to avoid generation gap.

Krishna-Brahma-Narada-Vyasadeva-Sukadeva-Parikshit-Suta

Considering all this, patient and submissive hearing is definitely essential.
One can attain the full pleasure of his heart’s desire. One very careful to
hear the message from the right source. When a ripened fruit is cut by the red
beaks of such birds, its sweet flavor is enhanced. The Vedic fruit which is
mature and ripe in knowledge is spoken through by Bhaktivedanta purports.
Parrot analogy, ability to present the work in a manner that would appeal to
all classes of men while preserving the main message.

Not jump to highest transcendental confidential rāsa dance whimsically, like
blunders. Hear step by step from the beginning canto by canto, chapter by
chapter building up. Deal with the subject so carefully. Understand from a
person who factually a representative of Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Carefully
presented, a sincere and serious person can at once enjoy the ripened fruit
of Vedic knowledge simply by drinking the nectarean juice through the mouth of
Śukadeva Gosvāmī or his bona fide representative, like Srila Prabhupada.

1.3.44

Simple hearing is not all; one must realize the text with proper attention.
Drink juice through ears. Have eyes for the ears to see, not just hear. Hear
with rapt attention from the bonafide transparent real person to realize the
presence of Lord Kṛṣṇa in every page. Non-envious hearing.

1.5.24

Bhaktivedantas imparted knowledge in Narada. He exemplified the hearing process
from bhaktivedanta purports.


--

6. How did Bhismadeva pacify and encourage the Pandavas? Write important comments by SP in the purports.

  1.9.12 Protected by Vipra, Dharma, Acyuta

  Yudhiṣṭhira put into difficulty by injustice only. Battle of Kurukṣetra to counteract this injustice. Pandavas always protected by brāhmaṇas, Lord and religious principles. No cause of disappointment. Fully in cooperation with Lord's wishes, guided by the bona fide brāhmaṇas, Vaiṣṇavas and strictly following religious principles, no cause for despondency, however trying the circumstances of life

  1.9.13 Kunti's suffering

  Kunti doubly lamented. Early widowhood, upon the great General Pāṇḍu’s death, get her minor children brought up in the royal family. When children grown up, continued to suffer because of her sons’ actions. Destined to suffer by providence, tolerate without disturbance.

  1.9.14 All done by inevitable time as wind controls clouds

  Time control all over the planets and space within the universe. Gigantic planets, including sun, controlled by the force of air, as clouds carried by the force of air. Everything controlled by the inevitable supreme kāla. Forceful representative of the Lord within the material world. Inconceivable action of time. Not disturbed and grudged by the tricks of eternal time. Even the great controller of the universe, Brahmājī, under time control.

  1.9.15 How can there be reverses?

  Despite the power of pious acts, personalities, expert management and weapons under Lord Kṛṣṇa's direct supervision, the Pāṇḍavas suffered so many practical reverses. Influence of kāla irreversible.

  1.9.16 No one can know Krishna's plan

  Since time immemorial no one, including demigods like Śiva and Brahmā, even sages with the exhaustive philosophical inquiries, could ascertain the Lord's real plan. Best policy, simply to abide by Lord's orders without argument. Pāṇḍavas' sufferings were never due to past deeds. The Lord had to execute the plan of establishing the kingdom of virtue, therefore His own devotees suffered temporarily in order to establish the conquest of virtue. Even a great fighter like Bhīṣma could not win the Battle of Kurukṣetra. Lord wanted to show that vice cannot conquer virtue, regardless of who tries to execute it.

  1.9.17 Accept Lord's plan

  Pandavas advised to accept the responsibility of administration without hesitation. Poor subjects were without protection due to the Battle of Kurukṣetra. awaiting the assumption of power by Yudhiṣṭhira. Lord's pure devotee accepts tribulations as favors.

--

7. What are the various stages of bhakti yoga presented in 1.2.16-21.

  1. Satam-krpa: causeless mercy of devotees. Initial mercy of a devotee. E.g. temple resident doing book distribution, showing mercy towards outside people who have not done endeavor. Even asuras can begin devotional life by mercy and be delivered take up this process.
  2. Mahat-seva: service to devotees, all troublesome to the heart is almost completely destroyed, like Narada and his maidservant mother to the sages. E.g. Book distributor gets donation, so the outside person is engaged in rendering service. Person can then come to the temple.
  3. Sraddha: faith developed by serving devotees, loving with care and attention.
  4. Guru-padasrayah: seeking shelter at the feet of guru, bhajani kriya starts, hearing about the message of Lord Vasudeva. Supersoul starts cleaning the abhadras and anartha nivritti begins.
  5. Bhajanesu-sprha: eagerness to worship, regularly performing Bhagavata puja.
  6. Bhaktih: bhakti
  7. Anarthapagamam: disappearance of obstacles. Unwanted, inauspicious and unfavorable desires, like lust, greed, anger, etc. Attachment to women and wealth. Lord cleansing if devotee endeavors. Sins to be cleaned to enter God's kingdom, almost nil, but not nil. Almost completely wiped out. Growing pyramid starting from small. Broader and broader. The more progress made, the more fixed. Parikshit to continue the childhood pastimes when Sukadeva Goswami trying to stop. Serving devotee bhagavata brings the benefit of book bhagavata. Mellows of devotional service, relishing the nectar of Krishna katha.
  8. Nistha: steadiness, regular absorption and hearing. Taking guidance from a pure devotee. Influences of lower modes disappear (restless, agitated and unstable mind), lust and greed.
  9. Ruci: taste, lack of taste for material objects, spiritual taste arises. Lower modes going down.
  10. Asakti: firm attachment. Upper modes coming up. Established in goodness. One's mind becomes peaceful. 
  11. Rati: fondness. Enlivened mind, peaceful. Also called bhava.
  12. Prema: devotional love. Establishing in contact of devotional service. Lord's bhakti.
  13. Darsanam: vision. Developing vijñānaṁ, experience, anubhava. Lord's realisation. Narada had Lord's darshan. Witnessing the Lord's form.
  14. Harer madhuryanubhava: direct experience of Lord Hari's sweetness. 

--

8. On what basis did Draupadi asked Asvatthama to be released?

  1.7.43 Dharmyam, brahmana. Not from the angle of śāstric vision, but as a matter of custom. Offered the same respect as offered to his father. Lord's devotee can tolerate all sorts of tribulation personally, but still such devotees never unkind to others, even to the enemy. Lord's pure devotees' characteristics.
  1.7.44 Nyayam, Dronacarya is Pandava's guru. Learned military art of throwing arrows, confidential art of controlling weapons. Fine military science with all its confidential secrets of throwing and controlling by Vedic hymns. Draupadī wished that Arjuna feel obliged for all these benefits. In Droṇācārya's absence, his son was his representative.
  1.7.45 Sakarunam, Krpi still living, no satī because she had a son, her husband's representative. Killing Aśvatthāmā is killing Droṇācārya.
  1.7.46 Nirvyaalikam, not good to cause pain to respectable order. Not good to cause grief to glorious family members always respectable and worshipful. A slight insult for a respectable family is sufficient to invoke grief. Cultured man careful in these dealings.
  1.7.47 Samam, do not make Dronacarya's wife cry, like Draupadi constantly did, aggrieved for the death of her sons. Sympathetic good lady not willing to put Droṇācārya's wife in the same position of childlessness, both from the point of motherly feelings and respectable position held by Droṇācārya's wife.
  1.7.48 Mahat, offence to brahmanas, burns royal family. Kingly administrative order, unrestricted in sense control, offends and enrages the brāhmaṇa order, fire of that rage burns up the whole body of the royal family, brings grief upon all. Brahmanas spiritually advanced, highly elevated, greet esteem by subordinates.

--

9. Write your learnings from Narada Muni’s past life as the son of a maid servant.

1.5.23 Son of maidservant in the previous kalpa - served the bhaktivedantis.

Insignificant parentage, not properly educated, still became an immortal sage
by service. Lord's service begins with service of the Lord’s bonafide servants.
Lord consents to reveal Himself in proportion to the service rendered.

1.5.24 Blessed him due to his qualities (satam-krpa, mahat seva, sraddha, guru padasraya)

Bhakti-vedāntas, impartial in distributing the transcendental knowledge of
devotional service. No one is enemy-friend; educated-uneducated,
favorable-unfavorable. Detached from childish sporting.

1.5.25 Took remnants, devotional service life became very attractive (bhajanesu sprha, bhakti, anarthapagama, nistha, ruci)

Sins eradicated. Purified in heart. Infected and enriched with their
transcendental qualities of purity by their association. All obstacles removed.
Attraction for the Personality of Godhead’s name, fame, qualities, pastimes,
etc. Imbibe the taste of pure devotion making all material things distasteful.
Steadiness. Transcendental emotions.

1.5.26 Hearing taste increased (asakta, rati)

Listen attentively to the right source, narration of Lord's pastimes becoming
Lord's associate. 

1.5.27 Uniterrupted attention, both subtle and gross bodies fixed on Lord

Unflinching. Ignorance-darkness, Lord-sun. Wherever light, no darkness.
Nescience removed. Bring water, cleanse temple, make obeisances, chant the holy
name, etc. Highly effective. No other engagement.

1.5.28 Constantly heard Lord's glories

Unadulterated. Passion-ignorance vanished. Transcendental loving service
natural, but dormant since time immemorial. River flows on till she reaches the
sea, similarly pure devotional service flows by pure devotees' association till
it reaches the ultimate goal. Flow cannot stop. Increases more and more without
limitation. Potent, any onlooker also liberated.

1.5.29 Loved them and strictly followed their instructions, developed prema.

Attachment to sages, gentle behaviour, strong faith, subjugate senses, obedient.
Devotee's signs.

1.5.30 Instructed in confidential bhakti-yoga
1.5.31 Result: ultimately return back home back to Godhead.

Agree to follow Śrī Nārada Muni's footsteps, went through the 14 stages.

-----

Section III

1. Describe the meditation of Vyasadeva (1.7.4-7) after being inspired by Narada Muni to write Srimad Bhagavatam.

1.7.4 Saw Supreme Lord along with His external energy.

No notice of Brahman's effulgence, not absolute vision. Absolute is eternal,
original and perfect purusa. Personality of Godhead, covered by golden glowing
hiraṇmayena pātreṇa veil of impersonal Brahman (Upaniṣads). When curtain is
removed by Lord's mercy, Absolute's real face seen. Manifold energies, internal
(moonlight), external (darkness) and marginal energies are specifically
important. Devotional service, bhakti-yoga, function of the internal energy; no
place for the inferior energy, material energy, just as no place for darkness in
the effulgence of spiritual light. Even superior to the spiritual bliss
attainable in the impersonal Brahman conception.

1.7.5 Saw living entity misidentifying himself and suffering in illusion

Living being by constitution transcendental to material encagement, now
imprisoned by the external energy (thankless task ), thinks himself one of the
material products. Due to this unholy contact, the pure spiritual entity
suffers material miseries under the modes of material nature. Misunderstands
himself to be a material product. Present perverted way of thinking, feeling and
willing, under material conditions, is not natural. Covered by nescience.
Necessary for reformation. Affectionate father does not like his children
chastised by another agent, yet puts his disobedient children under a severe
man's custody just to bring them to order. all-affectionate Almighty Father at
the same time desires relief for the conditioned soul, from the clutches of
illusory energy. King puts the disobedient citizens within the walls of the
jail, but sometimes the king, desiring the prisoners’ relief, personally goes
there and pleads for reformation. Prisoners are set free. Similarly, the Supreme
Lord descends. Remedial measure. Assocation and hearing, gradual elevation.
Reclaim by punishment, guru within and without. If living being and Lord were in
the same category, then it would have been quite possible for Vyāsadeva to see
it. Vyāsadeva diagnosed disease. Saw perfect Supreme Being, diseased conditioned
souls and also the cause of the disease.

1.7.6 Medicine for sufferings, bhakti-yoga

Vyāsadeva saw the all-perfect Personality of Godhead, different energies,
internal, marginal and external, different plenary portions, parts of the
plenary portions, different incarnations, conditioned souls' unwanted miseries,
remedial measure, process of devotional service, great transcendental science.
Revival of the dormant affection or love of Godhead. Chanting name, fame, glory,
etc. Depends on the causeless mercy of the Lord. When Lord fully satisfied.

1.7.7 Aural reception, sprouts bhakti

Ear most effective sense, works even in deep sleep. One can protect himself from
enemy hands while awake, but while asleep only protected by ear. Hearing
Bhagavatam getting attachment for Krishna. Material disease disappears.
Vyāsadeva saw the all-perfect Personality of Godhead. Genuine love between
Krishna and jivas. Affection similar to male/female. Living entity (prakriti),
Krishna (parama-purusa). No difference between Him and subject matter heard
about Him. Hearing about Him immediate contact with Him by the process of
vibration of the transcendental sound. So effective, acts at once by removing
all material affections. False complexity of materialism removed, real peace in
society begins, which politicians aspire for so eagerly in so many political
situations. Politicians’ peace conferences cannot bring about peace in society.

--

2. Explain how Krsna is the fountainhead of all incarnations?

1.3.1 A part of His opulence manifested as impersonal Brahman, Paramātmā.

1.3.28 Paribhasha sutra

All incarnations either plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions.
Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead. Distinguished from other
incarnations. Avatāra means “one who descends.”. All the incarnations, including
Himself, descend to the different planets of the material world as also in
different species of life to fulfill particular missions. All empowered by Him.
Lord is full of all opulences, prowess, fame, beauty, knowledge and
renunciation. When partly manifested through the plenary portions or parts of
the plenary portions, certain manifestations of His different powers are
required for those particular functions. When in the room small electric bulbs
displayed, but electric powerhouse not limited by small bulbs. Powerhouse
supplies power to operate large-scale industrial dynamos with greater volts.
Similarly, Lord's incarnations display limited powers needed at that particular
time.

Paraśurāma, Nṛsiṁha, unusual opulence. Jāmadagnya, Lord's power. Nārada, Lord's
empowered. Varāha, plenary incarnation. Buddha, indirectly empowered. Rāma,
Dhanvantari, fame. Balarāma, Mohinī, Vāmana, beauty. Dattātreya, Matsya, Kumāra,
Kapila, transcendental knowledge. Nara, Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣis, renunciation. They
manifested different features. Primeval Lord exhibited the complete features of
Godhead.

Most extraordinary feature exhibited by Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa was His internal
energetic manifestation of His pastimes with the cowherd girls, gopīs. Displays
of transcendental existence, bliss and knowledge, although these are manifested
apparently as sex love. Should never be misunderstood. Krisna has no source of
incarnation. All symptoms of the Supreme Truth in full are present in Kṛṣṇa's
person. No truth greater than or equal to Himself. Kṛṣṇa is summum bonum, one
without a second. Sixty-four principal attributes. All expansions, categories of
the Lord possess only some percentages of these attributes. Kṛṣṇa is the
possessor of the attributes cent percent. His personal expansions and avatāras
possess up to ninety-three percent. Śiva almost eighty-four percent. Jīvas in
different statuses of life, possess up to the limit of seventy-eight percent.
Very minute quantity, varying in terms of the pious life. Most perfect living
being, Brahmā, the supreme administrator of one universe possesses seventy-eight
percent. Other demigods have the same attributes in less quantity. Developing
seventy-eight percent, one can enter Kṛṣṇaloka.

Many wonderful items in feast, but halava sweatest. "tu" to distinguish Him.
Krishna with two hands not expansion of Vishnu with four hands.  Krishna source,
not Vishnu. Krishnadas Kaviraja Goswami, Adi Lila, Second Chapter, also
establishes using this verse. Bhagavatam, Tenth Topic, shelter of all other nine
topics. Krishna, asraya. Tenth Canto. Discussed more elaborately than all other
incarnations in Bhagavatam. Bhagavatam leading to the Tenth Canto, His intimate
activities.

Jiva Goswami, chapter began and ended with Krishna, accepted incarnations, like
technical paper abstracts and conclusions match for conferences. Entire Bhavatam
also, first verse and ending, meditation on Krishna. Krishna as incarnation in
23rd verse, but end says source. End more significant. This philosophical
statement more prominent than historical, incident. Soldiers following the
commander. Brahma, four-headed creator, folded hands, coming in front of six
years old cowherd boy, Krishna. Glorifying as superior to other forms. All forms
merge in Him. Bala Gopal, topmost manifestation. Main, principal subject matter,
12 Cantos, 335 Chapters, 121 Chapters dedicated, exclusively describing
Krishna's appearance, activities, and teachings. Common interest, main speaker
and hearer rsis eager to glorify Krishna. Book substitute for Krishna, not
incarnations. Krishna's name most prominent. Other scriptures also confirm
fountainhead. Krishna ornament of all ornaments. When Krishna wearing them,
ornaments become beautiful. Krishna attractive even to His incarnations. Even
incarnations acknowledge Krishna's supremacy. No better proof can exist.

--

3. Make a flow chart depicting various sections of Kunti Maharani’s prayers.

Knowing the Lord

1.8.18

Original personality. Unaffected by the qualities of the material world.
Existing both within and without everything, yet invisible to all.

1.8.19

Beyond the range of limited sense perception. Eternally irreproachable factor
covered by the curtain of deluding energy. Invisible to the foolish observer,
exactly as actor dressed as player not recognized.

1.8.20

Descend to propagate the transcendental science of devotional service unto the
hearts of the advanced transcendentalists and mental speculators, purified by
being able to discriminate between matter and spirit. How can women know You
perfectly?

Fortunate to receive reciprocation

1.8.21

Respectful obeisances unto the Lord, Vasudeva's son, Devakī's pleasure of
Devakī, boy of Nanda and the other cowherd men of Vṛndāvana, enlivener of the
cows and senses.

1.8.22

Respectful obeisances. Abdomen marked with depression like lotus flower. Always
decorated with garlands of lotus flowers. Glance as cool as the lotus. Feet
engraved with lotuses.

1.8.23

Hṛṣīkeśa, master of the senses. Lord of lords. Released mother, Devakī, long
imprisoned. Distressed by the envious King Kaṁsa. Me and my children from a
series of constant dangers.

1.8.24

Protected from a poisoned cake, great fire, cannibals, vicious assembly,
sufferings during exile in the forest, battle where great generals fought. Now,
saved from Aśvatthāmā's weapon.

1.8.25

Wish calamities would happen again to see You. Seeing You means no longer see
repeated births and deaths.

1.8.26

Approachable, but only by those materially exhausted. One on the path of
[material] progress, trying to improve with respectable parentage, great
opulence, high education and bodily beauty, cannot approach with sincere
feeling.

1.8.27

Obeisances, property of the materially impoverished. Nothing to do with the
actions and reactions of the material modes of nature. Self-satisfied, most
gentle, master of the monists.

1.8.28

Eternal time, supreme controller, without beginning and end, all-pervasive.
Distributing mercy, equal to everyone. Dissensions between living beings due to
social intercourse.

Mysterious nature of Lord's activities

1.8.29

No one can understand Your transcendental pastimes, appear to be human,
misleading. No specific object of favor, nor envy. People imagine partiality.

1.8.30

Verily bewildering, soul of the universe, work, though inactive. Take birth,
though vital force and unborn. Descend amongst animals, men, sages and aquatics.

1.8.31

Yaśodā took up a rope to bind You when committed an offense. Perturbed eyes
overflooded with tears, washed the mascara from eyes. Afraid, though fear
personified afraid of You. This sight bewildering.

Opinions about Lord's birth

1.8.32

Unborn born for the pious kings' glorification. Born to please King Yadu, one
of Your dearest devotees. Appear in his family as sandalwood in the Malaya
hills.

1.8.33

Since both Vasudeva and Devakī prayed for You, taken birth as their son.
Undoubtedly unborn, yet take birth for their welfare. To kill envious of
demigods.

1.8.34

World, overburdened like boat at sea, much aggrieved, that Brahmā, Your son,
prayed for You, so appeared to diminish the trouble.

1.8.35

Appeared for the sake of rejuvenating the devotional service of hearing,
remembering, worshiping. Conditioned souls suffering from material pangs might
take advantage and gain liberation.

1.8.36

Those continuously hear, chant and repeat Your transcendental activities, take
pleasure in others’ doing so, certainly see Your lotus feet, alone can stop the
repetition of birth and death.

Appeal for more association

1.8.37

Executed all duties. Laving us today, though completely dependent on Your
mercy. Have no one else to protect us, now when all kings at enmity with us.

1.8.38

Name-fame of a particular body finished with the living spirit's disappearance,
similarly if not look upon us, all our fame and activities, along with the
Pāṇḍavas and Yadus, end at once.

1.8.39

Gadādhara, kingdom marked by Your feet's impressions, appears beautiful. When
leave, no longer so.

1.8.40

Cities and villages flourishing in all respects, herbs and grains in abundance,
trees full of fruits, rivers flowing, hills full of minerals, oceans full of
wealth. Due to Your glancing over them.

1.8.41

Lord, soul, personality of the form of the universe, sever affection tie for
kinsmen, Pāṇḍavas, Vṛṣṇis.

1.8.42

Lord of Madhu, Ganges forever flows to sea without hindrance, let attraction
constantly drawn unto You without being diverted to anyone else.

1.8.43

Arjuna's friend, chief amongst the Vṛṣṇi descendants. Destroyer of political
parties, disturbing elements on earth. Prowess never deteriorates. Proprietor
of the transcendental abode.D escend to relieve the distresses of cows,
brāhmaṇas and devotees. Possess all mystic powers. Preceptor of the entire
universe. Almighty God. Respectful obeisances.

1.8.44

Lord mildly smiled, as enchanting as His mystic power.

--

4. How did Bhismadeva pacify and encourage the Pandavas?

1.9.12 Protected by Vipra, Dharma, Acyuta

Bhīṣmadeva understood Yudhiṣṭhira's disturbance due to great massacre in
Kurukṣetra battle. He spoke his terrible sufferings. Kurukṣetra war fought to
counteract this injustice. Not regret. Always protected by brāhmaṇas, the Lord
and religious principles. No cause of disappointment. Encouraged to dissipate
his despondency. Fully in cooperation with the Lord's wishes, guided by bona
fide brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas, strictly following religious principles, no cause
for despondency, however trying the circumstances of life.

1.9.13 Kunti's suffering

Doubly lamented daughter-in-law. Suffered greatly because of early widowhood,
upon the great General Pāṇḍu’s death, and to get her minor children brought up
in the royal family. When her children grown up, continued to suffer because of
her sons’ actions. Destined to suffer by providence, one has to tolerate without
being disturbed.

1.9.14 Done be inevitable time as wind controls clouds

Control by time all over the space within the universe and all over the planets.
All the big gigantic planets, including the sun, controlled by the force of air,
as clouds are carried by the force of air. Similarly, the inevitable kāla,
controls even the action of the air and other elements.  Everything controlled
by the supreme kāla, Lord's forceful representative within the material world.
Yudhiṣṭhira should not be sorry for the inconceivable action of time. Everyone
to bear the actions and reactions of time within the conditions of the material
world. Yudhiṣṭhira has not committed sins in his previous birth and is not
suffering the consequences. Even the most pious has to suffer the condition of
material nature, but faithful to the Lord, guided by the bona fide brāhmaṇa and
Vaiṣṇava following the religious principles. These three guiding principles
should be the aim of life, no disturbance by the tricks of eternal time. Even
the great controller of the universe, Brahmājī, also under the control of time,
not grudge controlled by time despite a true follower of religious principles.

1.9.15 Irreversible

No scarcity of material and spiritual resources for the Pāṇḍavas. Materially
well-equipped with two great warriors. Great bowman Arjuna with mighty weapon
Gāṇḍīva. Bhīma, great fighter with club. Spiritually, King, symbol of religion.
Yudhiṣṭhira, son of the demigod controlling religion. Above all of them, Kṛṣṇa,
personally concerned with their affairs as the well-wisher.

Yet, many reverses on the Pāṇḍavas' side. Despite the power of pious acts,
personalities, expert management and weapons under Kṛṣṇa's direct supervision,
Pāṇḍavas suffered many practical reverses. Only explained as due to the
influence of kāla, inevitable time.  Kāla identical with Lord. Influence of kāla
indicates Lord's inexplicable wish. Nothing to be lamented when a matter is
beyond any human's control.

1.9.16 No one knows Krishna's plan

Yudhiṣṭhira's bewilderment over past sinful acts, resultant sufferings,
completely negated by Bhīṣma. Since time immemorial no one, including such
demigods as Śiva, Brahmā, or even the sages' exhaustive philosophical inquiries,
could ascertain Lord's real plan. Best policy, simply to abide by the Lord's
orders without argument. Pāṇḍava sufferings never due to past deeds. His
devotees suffered temporarily in order to establish the conquest and kingdom of
virtue. Bhīṣmadeva satisfied seeing the triumph of virtue, Yudhiṣṭhira on the
throne, although fought against him. Even great fighters, like Bhīṣma, could
not win the Kurukṣetra war. Vice cannot conquer virtue, regardless of who tries
to execute it. Bhīṣmadeva, great devotee of the Lord, but fought against the
Pāṇḍavas by Lord's will of the Lord. Cannot
win on the wrong side.

1.9.17 Accept Lord's plan

Devotee’s duty to ungrudgingly accept Lord's tribulations as benediction and
favors. Lord absolute, no mundane difference between them. Advised Pāṇḍavas to
accept administration responsibilities without hesitation.  Poor subjects
without protection due to the Kurukṣetra war. Awaiting the assumption of power
by Yudhiṣṭhira.

--

5. Give a summary of Bhisma’s prayers.

1.9.32 Invest thinking, feeling, willing.

Statesman, Kuru dynasty head, great general, kṣatriya leader, mind strewn over
so many subjects. To achieve pure devotional service, invest all in Krishna. No
desire other than Lord's service. Desires cannot be wiped out, but purified.

1.9.33 Rati for Vijaya-sakha

Arjuna's intimate friend. Attractive features of Krishna's transcendental body
are desired in all the three worlds, upper, middle and lower planetary systems.
Nowhere in the universe are there such beautiful bodily features as those of
Lord Kṛṣṇa. Nowhere in the universe are there such beautiful bodily features as
those of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Remembering the particular dress of Lord Kṛṣṇa which He put
on as the driver of Arjuna’s chariot.

Remembering the particular dress of Lord Kṛṣṇa as the driver of Arjuna’s
chariot. While fighting between Arjuna and Bhīṣma, Bhīṣma’s attraction drawn by
the glittering dress of Kṛṣṇa. Indirectly he admired his so-called enemy Arjuna
for possessing the Lord as his friend. Lord pleased when addressed conjointly
with His devotees. Sun rays glittered on Lord's dress, beautiful hue created by
ray reflections, never forgotten by Bhīṣmadeva. Relishing, in highest ecstasy,
the relation of Kṛṣṇa in the chivalrous humor.

1.9.34 Meditation on Krishna's on battlefield

Bhīṣmadeva, Lord's great devotee in servitorship relation. His throwing of sharp
arrows at the transcendental body of the Lord is as good as the worship of
another devotee who throws soft roses upon Him. Appears that Bhīṣmadeva
repenting the actions committed against the Lord, but Lord's body not in pain as
transcendental, not matter. Pleasing to the Lord as the biting of a fiancee who
bites the Lord’s body directed by a strong sense of sex desire. Fighting as an
exchange of transcendental pleasure. Body and Lord are identical, no wound
possibility.

Appreciated Lord's all-merciful attitude not leaving Arjuna alone although
disturbed by sharpened arrows. Nor reluctant to come before Bhīṣma’s deathbed,
although seemingly ill-treated by him on the battlefield. Bhīṣma’s repentance
and the Lord’s merciful attitude both unique. Fixes mind on Kṛṣṇa's wounded
condition.

1.9.35 Rati for Partha-sakha

Executing a devotee's order, like Arjuna's, Lord pleased, as father pleased to
carry out his small child's order. Possible only out of pure transcendental love
between the Lord and His devotees. Bhīṣmadeva aware. Addressed Lord as Arjuna's
friend.

1.9.36 Arjuna's Enlightener

Apparently Arjuna’s intelligence became polluted because otherwise no chance to
deliver the teachings of Bhagavad-gītā for the good of all polluted conditioned
souls engaged in material bondage. Bhisma prayed for attraction of Krishna's
lotus feet.

1.9.37 Sacrifier of Own promise

Bhīṣmadeva's vow that next day Kṛṣṇa has to take up weapons Himself, otherwise
Arjuna dies. Arjuna almost defeated, Kṛṣṇa pleased Bhisma by keeping his, and
seemingly breaking His of remaining without weapon. Protected Arjuna, like lion
to kill an elephant. Unconsciously dropped His outer garment.

1.9.38 Gati for Mukunda

Favor to Bhīṣmadeva, pleasing the Lord in garb by playing enemy. Devotee cannot
become enemy. Enemy cannot desire Lord as ultimate destination. Krishna did so
because warrior devotee wanted to see Lord's transcendental beauty decorated
with wounds created by a pure devotee. Transcendental rasa. Arjuna checked
Krishna, but proceeded towards Bhīṣmadeva as a lover goes to a lover, without
caring for hindrances. Bhīṣmadeva aspires to see the Lord in His personal
feature.

1.9.39 Rati for Partha-sarathi

Constantly remembering the Lord’s personal feature along with His holy name,
fame, pastimes. Spontaneous affection. Military marshal, constantly remembered
the battlefield feature of the Lord as Pārtha-sārathi, Arjuna's chariot driver.
Even Arjuna could not see from behind. More relish than Arjuna from the front.
In such pastimes His associates like the Pāṇḍavas and Bhīṣma are constant
eternal companions. Able to see Him face to face. Attained svarūpa.

1.9.40 Gopis' love supreme

Aspiration to remember the gopīs is a prayer to have their mercy also at the
last stage of his life. Lord more satisfied when His pure devotees glorified, so
not only glorified Arjuna, but also gopis. Lord's relation with Arjuna
undoubtedly praiseworthy, but the gopīs's relation with the Lord still more
praiseworthy. Arjuna no equal strength. Gopis equal footing, one with the Lord.

1.9.41 Krishna worshipped at Rajasuya

Rājasūya-yajña, Kṛṣṇa, cynosure of neighboring eyes. Remembered the incident to
keep his mind upon the Lord. Glad Lord present before him in His actual formal
presence. To meditate on Him, meditate on His activities, form, pastimes, name
and fame.

1.9.42 Now meditate on Krishna

Lord present in everyone's heart, like sun before everyone. No difference
between Him, brahmajyoti and Paramātmā. Duality misconception completely removed
from Bhīṣmadeva's mind. Bhīṣmadeva's worshipable object of Bhīṣmadeva is Kṛṣṇa
as Pārtha-sārathi, non-different from the gopīs' Śyāmasundara in Vṛndāvana. Both
personal feature. Bhīṣmadeva realizes all these different features of Kṛṣṇa.

1.9.43 Bhishma's samadhi - entered Vaikuntha where Lord in the Partha sarathi
form.

nirvikalpa-samādhi, merged into thinking of the Lord and His different
activities. Chanted His glories. Began to see the Lord personally present before
him. All his activities became concentrated upon the Lord without deviation.
Highest perfection. Human life for dying like Bhīṣmadeva.

--

6. How is the process of devotional service glorified in 1.5.8-22?

1.5.8 Lord expanded Himself as living beings to accept loving service, alone
can satisfy both the Lord and living beings.

1.5.9 Religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and salvation, far
inferior to devotional service. No one can be pleased substantially without
engagement in Lord's devotional service. Satisfaction. Vyāsadeva's describing
devotional service would cure him from despondency.

1.5.10 Crows, fruitive workers, passionate men. Swans, saintly persons.
Different mental attitudes. Swanlike spiritually advanced men keep up the
standard of transcendental voluntary service.

1.5.11 Polluted atmosphere of the world changes. Bring about the desired peace.
Change of heart. Diminish the activities of people's corrupt mind. Jaundice,
sugar candy remedy. Devotional service acts like sugar candy for the
jaundicelike condition of sense gratification. Poison ceases.

1.5.12 Fruitive work can be fruitful only when made subservient to devotional
service offered to the Lord. No material bondage.

1.5.13 Liberated souls like Vyāsadeva and his bona fide representatives
completely merged in the transcendental loving service. Lord's pastimes and
their transcendental nature become automatically manifest by dint of devotional
service.

1.5.14 Pouring water on root, right process to water the tree. Ffeeding the
stomach supplies energy to all bodily parts. Accurate direction,
self-realization in eternal relation with Krishna by devotional service in
transcendental love.

1.5.15 Prime necessity of human life is to realize one’s eternal relation with
the Lord and thus surrender unto Him without delay.

1.5.16 Gradually become purified from material diseases. Devotional service is
dynamic activity. Such transcendental activities of the devotees for the
service of the Lord can bring a new peaceful order of life to the foolish
society of materialistic men.

1.5.17 Sometimes, one surrenders unto Lord's service by temporary sentiment, in
the long run, due to many other reasons, falls down from the path of service by
undesirable association. Bharata-stag, did not forget the incident of his
previous birth. Citraketu's offenses at Śiva's feet. Even though one falls down
from the prescribed duties of devotional service, never forget Lord's lotus
feet. Once engaged, will continue the service in all circumstances.
Bhagavad-gītā, even a small quantity of devotional service can save one from
the most dangerous position. Ajāmila, devotee, falling down, Lord saved him at the end.

1.5.18 Only endeavor to go back to Godhead, life mission.

1.5.19 Lord's devotee automatically uninterested in the enchantment of material
existence, rasa-graha,one who has tasted the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa' lotus feet.
Even after falls-down, devotee never considered a fallen karmī. Karmī suffers
the result of fruitive reactions, devotee reformed by chastisement. Orphan child
really poor, no one to take care of him. Rich man's beloved son appears on the
same level, but always under capable father's vigilance. Fallen devotees given
a chance to take birth in a family of highly qualified brāhmaṇas or rich
mercantile.

1.5.20-21 Godless civilization detached from the transcendental loving service,
peace or tranquillity, is like detached hand or leg. 

1.5.22 śruti directs, dvanced in learning should aspire for devotional service.
When advancement of knowledge applied in devotional service, whole process
becomes absolute. Vālmīki, great poet. Vālmīki, great writer. Become immortal.
--

7. Write any eight points of glorification of Bhagavatam.

1.1.1

Narration of Lord's svarūpa manifested by His internal potency. Śrīdhara Svāmī,
reference to Bhāgavatam in many oldest Purāṇas, e.g. Matsya Purāṇa. Clearly
stated, finished in twelve cantos, eighteen thousand ślokas. One attains to the
highest perfection of life by returning to Godhead. Padma Purāṇa,
Gautama-Ambarīṣa, king to read SB. Liberation from material bondage. Past five
hundred years, many erudite scholars and ācāryas like Jīva Gosvāmī, Sanātana
Gosvāmī, Viśvanātha Cakravartī, Vallabhācārya, and many other distinguished
scholars even after the time of Lord Caitanya made elaborate commentaries on
the Bhāgavatam.

1.1.2

1. Rejects cheating religion

Man turns to religion, performs pious activities or religious functions to gain
something material. Religion is performed for some economic gains.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam transcendental to all these sense gratificatory activities.

2. Propounds highest truth

Information about the Absolute Truth in His personal feature. Higher than
impersonalist literatures and jñāna-kāṇḍa division of the Vedas. Even higher
than the karma-kāṇḍa and upāsanā-kāṇḍa divisions, competition to reach heavenly
planets for better sense gratification. Recommends the worship of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Superior to all. Aims at the Supreme Truth. Substance
or root of all categories. Substance, Absolute Truth, the Supreme Lord, all
emanations are relative forms of energy. Explicitly promulgates
simultaneously-one-and-different philosophy of the Vedānta-sūtra.

3. Understandable by non-envious

Purely transcendental literature, understood only by Lord's pure devotees.
Transcendental to competitive sense gratification. Such transcendentalists,
nonenvious, pure in heart. Well-wishers to everyone.

4. Distinguishes reality from illusion

Material world, keen competition, animals, men, communities, nations. Devotees
rise above. No competition with the materialist, on the path back to Godhead,
eterna and blissful life.

5. Uproots 3 miseries

a. from the mind and body
b. inflicted by other living beings
c. from natural catastrophes without control

Development of this transcendental consciousness grounded in the conception of
simultaneously-one-and-different leads one immediately to the stage of freedom
from the threefold miseries. As soon as one knows his real position as
transcendental servant, at once becomes free from all miseries. By service,
immediately freed from material encumbrances.

6. Sufficient for God realization

Begins with the devotee's surrender unto the Absolute Person. Other Purāṇas,
different methods by which worship the demigods. Bhāgavatam, only the Supreme
Lord. Total body, demigods different parts. By worshiping the Supreme Lord, no
need to worship the demigods. Lord becomes fixed in the devotee's heart
immediately. Caitanya Mahāprabhu recommended the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the
spotless Purāṇa, distinguishes it from all other Purāṇas.

7. Establishes Lord in heart

Devotee fully aware that one with the Absolute, at the same time in the eternal
position of servant to the Absolute.

8. Mature fruit of Vedic literature - became tastier by the touch of the lips
of Sukadeva Goswami

Personal commentation on the Vedānta-sūtra by Śrī Vyāsadeva. Written in the
maturity of his spiritual life through the mercy of Nārada. Authorized
incarnation of Nārāyaṇa, the Personality of Godhead. Author
of all other Vedic literatures, yet recommends the study of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
above all others. Qualified to hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam after many pious deeds.
Intelligent person, with thoughtful discretion, assured by the great sage
Vyāsadeva to realize the Supreme Personality directly by hearing
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

1.1.3

Sublime literature, surpasses all other Vedic scriptures, mundane activities
and knowledge due to its transcendental qualities. Ripened fruit of all Vedic
literatures. Cream of all Vedic knowledge. Spiritual rasa, relished even in the
liberated stage, experienced in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. By submissive hearing this
transcendental literature, attain the full pleasure of his heart’s desire.
Received from the right source. Brought by Nārada Muni from the spiritual
world. Given to his disciple Vyāsadeva. Then, Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam the transcendental pastimes of the Lord are narrated
and systematically depicted. The subject matter is appealing to all classes of
persons, including those who seek liberation and become one with the supreme
whole. Parrot-śuka, sweet flavor enhanced by red breaks cutting the fruit. Lips
of lips of Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Nectarean juice through his mouth.

1.3.40 Incarnation of God

Caitanya Mahāprabhu declared Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the spotless sound
representation of all Vedic knowledge and history. Literary incarnation.
Nondifferent from Him. Can derive the ultimate blessings of the Lord. As God
all light, bliss and perfection, so is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Can have all the
transcendental light of the Supreme Brahman, all benefits possible from Lord's
personal presence.

1.3.41 Cream of all scriptures

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam historical facts selected from the histories of
different planets have been depicted. Accepted by all the spiritual authorities
as the Mahā-purāṇa. Special significance, all connected with Lord's activities
in a different time and atmosphere. Cream of the milk. Milk Ocean of knowledge.
Cream or butter, most palatable essence of milk, so is Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, all
palatable, instructive and authentic versions of Lord's different activities
and His devotees. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Kṛṣṇa Himself in the form of recorded
knowledge. Cream of all the Vedas. Historical facts of all times in relation
with Kṛṣṇa. Essence of all histories.

1.3.42 Sukadeva Goswami to Parikshit
1.3.43 Sun-like Bhagavatam arose when Krishna departed, Kali Yuga.

Torchbearers for the blind people of this age. Summum bonum of life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
personified. Direct representation. Identical. One who can see
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam can see also Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa in person. Real light, aim of
life fulfilled. Brilliant as sun.

1.3.44 Parampara: Sukadeva-Parikshit-Suta-sages

One can certainly see directly the presence of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the pages.
Sūta Gosvāmī drank the juice of Bhāgavatam through his ears.

1.7.6 Medicine for sufferings, bhakti-yoga
1.7.7 Aural reception - sprouts bhakti

Hearing the message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam one gets attachment for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. As soon as this is effected the symptoms of the
material disease disappear. False complexity of materialism removed. Real peace
in society begins, which politicians aspire for so eagerly in so many political
situations. Politicians’ peace conferences cannot bring about peace in society.
One can have direct connection with Kṛṣṇa, attain the highest perfection of
life by transcending worldly miseries, illusion and fearfulness.
