Module 2 (SB 1.10-19)

1. The Hastinapura ladies' words are glorified as "sarva sruti manoharam."
Srila Prabhupada comments, "Anything sung in praise of the Lord is a sruti
mantra." Write a brief note quoting sastric references about: (i) Devotional
movies, audio albums and books by people not practicing Krsña consciousness,
(ii) Krsña-katha by a neophyte practitioner of Krsña consciousness.

2. "The ladies, who were all absorbed in the thought and actions of the Lord,
developed the consciousness of Vedic wisdom by the grace of the Lord. And
therefore although such ladies might not have been very learned scholars in
Sanskrit or otherwise, still whatever they spoke was more attractive than the
Vedic hymns." (1.10.20P) How can one be fixed in bhakti and please the Lord
more by simple prayers than by deep study of sastra? Why should one spend so
much time studying the scriptures?

3. 1.13.10 describes devotees as the personification of holy places. Compare
the purifying potency of a dhama and a devotee, quoting relevant sastric
references.

08:13

Answer:

Yudishtira glorifies Vidura as holy place personified. Convert holy places
into holier. Carry the Lord's holy feet in their heart. Wherever they travel.
Good fortune for those places, not Vidura. Just like the fortunate ornaments
when Krishna wears them. Lord Rama verifies the glories of good qualities by
possessing them.

Lord's omnipresence perceived and manifested by unalloyed devotees, as
electricity in electric bulb. Electrical energy can be felt when bulb on, can
see, no darkness. Pure devotees always feel the presence of the Lord
everywhere, everything in the potency of the Lord and the Lord in
everything. Compassion manifested through pure devotee. Place filled with
wonderful vibrations. Ether permuated with the pure devotee's consciousness.
Increases holiness.

Holy places all over the earth meant for purifying the polluted consciousness
of the human being by an atmosphere surcharged with the presence of the Lord’s
unalloyed devotees.

Search out pure devotees residing in holy places, take lessons from them, apply
instructions in practical, gradually prepare oneself for the ultimate
salvation, going back to Godhead. Show eagerness and enthusiasm to take these
teachings. Perfection of one's visit to pilgrimage places, not merely taking
bath. Purpose, bathing oneself in the nectarian glorification of Krishna
emanating from pure devotees' mouth. Hear Krishna Katha. Sravanam, kirtanam.

Going to holy places of pilgrimage, not only to take bath in the
Ganges, Yamunā or to visit the temples. Find representatives of Vidura, no
desire in life save and except to serve the Personality of Godhead. Krishna
always with such pure devotees because of unalloyed service, without any tinge
of fruitive action or utopian speculation. Actual service of the Lord, by the
process of hearing and chanting. Pure devotees hear from the authorities,
chant, sing and write of the Lord's glories. Prabhupada paraphrasing BRS
01.01.011 anyabhilasita-sunyam.

SB 1.2.6 sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo - pure devotees no other selfish agenda
and ulterior motives (ahaituky) in practice of pure devotional service. Access
to real happiness. Lord manifests directly in heart. Convert dirty into holy
places. 

By actions, Lord's pure devotees render any place into a place of pilgrimage.
Holy places worth the name only on their account. Pure devotees rectify the
polluted atmosphere of any place.

Bhagiratha tapasya in Ganga. Ganga asking Bhagiratha before descending. Sinful
taking bath dumping and accumulating all sins. Relieve from all sins by sadhus'
bathing. Nullify and vanquish all sins. "loka pavanaha haranthi adamthe". By
the association of their body.

4. Vidura doesn’t reveal the truth about the Yadus to the Pandavas even when he
was asked for it. He reveals the naked truth of life to Dhrtarästra even when
he did not ask for it. What do we learn from this behaviour? Discuss how to
apply this in our practice of bhakti? [OR]

"One should not become an instrument of spreading negativity." Explain this
based on relevant verses from 1.13 and discuss the implications of not
following this in the life of a practicing devotee, both individually and
institutionally.

5. Yudhistira Maharaja was aggrieved for the (i) destruction that happened in
the war, (ii) departure of Bhismadeva, (iii) uninformed retirement of his
uncles and aunt, (iv) disappearance of Lord Krsña. Devotees counseled him in
only two of these cases and not the other two. Discuss what could be inferred
and learnt from this.

6. If Pariksit Maharaja had killed Kali instead of forgiving him, we wouldn’t
be suffering the affects of Kali now. If someone raises this argument, how
would you comprehensively answer him?

7. Pariksit Maharaja and many other personalities mentioned in Canto 1 were
dealt with inappropriately, but tolerated it. 1.18.48 says that a devotee never
retaliates. How do we apply this in our practical life? Does it mean that one
should allow oneself to be exploited? Elaborate.

Answer:

Also affected the Pandavas earlier. Asection in Queen Kunti's prayers is also
about forbearing calamities and taking them as mercy. Narada also lost his
maid-servant mother, etc.

Ṛṣi Śamīka thought that if Mahārāja Parīkṣit countercursed the boy, he might be
saved. But pure devotees are callous about worldly advantages or reverses,
never inclined to counteract personal defamation, curses, negligence, etc.
Devotees do not care for such personal affairs. Parikshit surrendered to Lord
unafraid of snake bird biting, detached from body. Śamīka glorified devotees
for their tolerance.

But if against the Lord and His devotees, the devotees take very strong action.
This was a personal affair, therefore Śamīka Ṛṣi knew that the King would not
take counteraction.

Devotees more powerful than brāhmaṇas. Powerful devotees never misuse the power
for personal benefit. Whatever power the devotee may have, always
utilized in service towards the Lord and His devotees only.

First victim of childish brahmanical injustice, Kali entering through Sringi.
Parikshit accepted it, not asked for dying under more befitting conditions. Did
not condemn the entire brahmana caste for this. Not a show of humility. No
malice, but same respect maintained. He surrendered to another brahmana boy,
Sukadeva Goswami. Arms (arms) have to follow the head (brahmanas).

Great character receiving Krishna's will as it is, allowing Krishna raise in
our life. Parikshit allowed Bhagavatam to rise. Consciousness matters. Krishna
puts devotees in a position to primarily and exclusively focus on Krishna
Consciousness. Lord's plan to put devotees in bewildering conditions for a
higher plan, even for saintly kings when tired and fatigued, hunger-stricken.
Delivered from material existence. We should not overreact when someone commits
mistakes, like Sringi as instrument. Child can be forgiven.

Never inclined to take revenge, or say does not accept the curse, calamity,
etc. Not wanting to nullify and use power for self-preservation. Not minding
the curse. Fulfill the Lord's desire. Ordained by the Supreme Person. But
greatful and remain humble in awkward situations. All these are getting us
closer to remembering Krishna.

Does not, however, mean to allow exploitation. Stand for ourselves if brings us
closer to Krishna, especially when others offend devotees and Krishna. Endeavor
as one of the inches in Damodar-lila. But leave the results with Krishna, come
what may. No need to accept exploitation if not beneficial, conducive and
favorable for our Krishna Consciousness. But accepting great difficulties with
humility if it helps us achieve the main goal of always remembering Krishna and
never forgetting him, that is productive. Not the doers.

8. Srila Prabhupada writes in the purports of 1.13, "Great souls cheat for a
great cause." Elaborate on this principle based on some sastric example.

9. "The sane man should rather feel obliged to the Lord for such benefactions
and must utilize such power for the service of the Lord." (1.15.5P). How does
one attribute the success of one’s activities to the mercy of the guru and
Vaisñavas? Choose a situation in your life, and attempt to connect different
aspects of that situation to your superiors’ blessings in a concrete way.

Answer:

BG 10.41: Anyone specifically powerful and opulent in wealth, strength, beauty,
knowledge and all that is materially desirable is to be considered but a
product of an insignificant portion of the complete whole of My energy.

No one, therefore, can be independently powerful in any measure without being
endowed by the Lord. Empowers His devotees with the required energy to execute
His mission of incarnation.

The power and energy bestowed upon Arjuna were required for fulfillment of the
Lord's mission. Hero of Kuruksetra to win the war. When fulfilled, the
emergency powers and skills, astonishing even to the denizens of heaven
(mesmerised and impressed Shiva, Indra and Mayadhana), no longer required, so
withdrawn. Lost and bereft. Not meant for going back home, back to Godhead.

If endowment and withdrawal of powers by the Lord possible even for great
devotees like Arjuna, or demigods in heaven, twhat to speak of the ordinary
living beings who are but figs compared to such great souls.

Should not be puffed up for powers borrowed from the Lord. Feel obliged to the
Lord. Such power can be withdrawn at any time by the Lord. Best to engage them
in the service of the Lord. Not independent from the Lord. All credit to
Krishna, not claiming anything for oneself. Powers belong to and source in
Krishna. Not doer, Krishna is the doer. Brahma praying for empowerment for
creation. Unable to do it without Krishna. Not become proud. Fortune is to
assist in this service. Right mood. No deviation.

Lack of skills not disqualification to go back to Godhead, to execute
devotional service. If one has skills, opportunity to engage them in Krishna'
service and get blessings. Not meant to make one puffed up in accomplishments.
No anxiety and insecure if no skills. Sincerity of heart accepted, whatever
service. All these skills emanating from Krishna. Detachment from skills.
Cultivate devotion. Devotee always grateful to the Lord for opportunities to
render service to Him and participate. Whatever there, at his disposal, without
reservations, utilises them in Krishna's service without claiming credits.

Not puffed up by borrowed limbs of feather. Crow takes peacock feather, saying
looking so beautiful, nobody appreciates that beauty. Similarly, living entity
given power by the Lord, saying my power, devotees will not appreciate him. No
control over gross possessions, belongings, wealth, and subtle skills, power of
speech, singing, managing, deity worship, etc. Birds fly in the sky to their
capacity. Ramayana gives different degradation. Jatai and Sampati so high to
the sun, burning their wings. Similarly, to the extent, devotees are empowered
by Krishna with the power of description, to that extent, they can describe
Krishna's glories. Power of glorifying the Lord also comes from Krishna, Suta
Goswami says. Maitreya Muni, "tathapi kirtayam". No sufficient capability,
still glorify the Lord. As much as we get, we must employ that. What is there
within one's control, work with it. What is there in the devotee's scope is
minute independendence. Krishna does not interfere. Can be utilised to render
service. Voluntary choice.

Brahma in SB 2.6, just re-create what has already been created by Krishna,
secondary creator, accept subordination.

I used to live far away from the temple with no access to the deities, regular
harinams, book distribution, mentorship group. I remember I was speaking with a
devotee during my visit to the ashram in London. Suddenly, he introduced me to
his mentor and then his mentor accepted me as his mentee. He asked also me to
move closer to the temple in London. It was challanging for me because I had
been in a senior job for 7 years, but after some months of careful
consideration, I became detached and the opportunity has also risen that I
could accept a job 5-10 mins walk away from the temple. I feel like this was a
great mercy of my Vaishnava friend and the new mentors, who are my siksa gurus.
By their mercy, my life has changed for the better. I have more regular
association, able to facilitate Prabhupada classes, rarely lead Guru puja or
mangala arati, participate and learn in book distribution, etc. This would not
have been possible without the vaishnavas and gurus. However, I need to be
grateful for this arrangement and plans of the Lord and not take this for
granted. Any of these favorable circumstances can be taken away at any point by
Krishna's will, like similarly conducive situations were taken away in my life
when I had to move away from the temples before for a job. Completely and
helplessly dependent on Krishna's, gurus' and Vaishnavas' mercy.

10. After coming back to his palace, Pariksit Maharaja contemplated on his
behaviour with Çaméka Åñi. He expected and desired calamity upon himself for
his insignificant mistake. What inspiration do you derive from his example?
