Guidelines

• Open Book Exams test the understanding of the students more than their
  ability to memorize.

• Practical application, personal application, analysis and shastric
  understanding are some of the themes on which the open book questions are set.

• Answers need to be relevant to the theme of the question. The answer may even
  negate the question by presenting relevant arguments. Real life incidents and
  relevant shastric quotations, analogies, examples and personal reflections may
  also be included, as necessary.

• The following are some of the aspects observed in the evaluation of the open book essays –

  o Balanced presentation: PLEASE formula (Personal/ practical application,
    Lesson, Example, Analogy, Sastric connections and Elaboration – the answer
    could contain one or more of these aspects)
  o Philosophical accuracy
  o Degree of relevance(of PLEASE) to the question.
  o Eloquence, redundancy, number of words, etc.

=====

The students are expected to write open book essays summing up to a total of
20,000 words on the first six cantos of Srimad-Bhagavatam. The details of words
for individual cantos is given below.

• 12-20 open book questions are given for each test and the students are
required to answer any 3 to 6 of them making the total word count of all the
essays to the specified number (1500/2000/2500).

Canto Exam 1                Exam 2                 Total words
1     2000 words (1.1-9)    1500 words (1.10-19)   3500
2     2500 words (2.1-10)   -                      2500
3     2500 words (3.1-14)   2000 words (3.15-33)   4500
4     2000 words (4.1-14)   2000 words (4.15-31)   4000
5     2000 words (5.1-26)   -                      2000
6     2000 words (6.1-9)    1500 words (6.10-19)   3500
Grand Total                                        20,000

=====

Module 1 (SB 1.1-9)

---

1. Gather principles on etiquette followed by the sages of Naimisaranya in
asking questions to Srila Suta Gosvami.

---

2. What principles do we learn from the mood of great souls like the sages of
Naimisaranya, Vyasadeva, the Pandavas, Pariksit Maharaja, etc., towards the
people in general?

---

3. Srila Prabhupada says:

“Within the past five hundred years, many erudite scholars and acaryas like
Jiva Gosvami, Sanatana Gosvami, Visvanatha Cakravarti, Vallabhacarya, and many
other distinguished scholars even after the time of Lord Caitanya made
elaborate commentaries on the Bhagavatam. And the serious student would do well
to attempt to go through them to better relish the transcendental messages.”
(1.1.1 P)

“Personal realization does not mean that one should, out of vanity, attempt to
show one’s own learning by trying to surpass the previous acarya. He must have
full confidence in the previous acarya, and at the same time he must realize
the subject matter so nicely that he can present the matter for the particular
circumstances in a suitable manner” – (1.4.1 P)

Reflect on how to be fixed in Srila Prabhupada’s purports, still study the
commentaries of previous acaryas, and yet, be able to present the Bhagavatam to
modern audiences suitably.

---

4. Draw lessons accompanied by a brief elaboration from Srila Vyasadeva’s
conduct as a disciple, and Narada’s expertize and honesty as a spiritual
master. How does this inspire you?

---

5. Write an essay on the theme “Glorification to Krsña is the solution to all
problems,” based on the Vyasadeva-Narada episode (1.4-6).

---

6. Present your understanding of the Bhaktivedanta purports on the following:
(i) Qualification of a speaker of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
(ii) Qualities of a hearer of Srimad-Bhagavatam,
(iii) Power of Srimad-Bhagavatam.

---

7. “But, anyway, we should not give up our reason and discriminatory power just
to be gentle. One must have good discriminatory power to judge a thing on its
merit.” (1.7.42)

Srila Prabhupada writes the above lines in relation to the word vama-svabhava,
mild and gentle by nature. Is vama-svabhava a barrier in dealing with
practicalities of life? Comment.

---

8. Srila Prabhupäda writes, “...It depends on the quality of feeling. A
helpless man can feelingly utter the holy name of the Lord, whereas a man who
utters the same holy name in great material satisfaction cannot be so
sincere...”

Mention a few things that help you call out with genuine feeling, and few
things that reduce your feeling shelter in the Lord’s holy names.

---

9. Queen Kunti prays for more and more difficulties so that she could remember
Krsña.

SB-01.08.18-30 - KUNTIDEVI PRAYERS1.mp3: From ~49:30

a. Derive principles for personal application for your practice of Krsña
consciousness, from Queen Kunti’s attitude.
b. Write your thoughts on presenting such a mood of a devotee to a newcomer or
a non-practitioner of Krsña consciousness.

1.8.25 Wish calamities would happen again to see Krishna, no longer see
repeated births and deaths. Not once, many times. Krishna's darshan, no darshan
of material existence. Impediment becomes impetus. Intimacy and affection for
Krishna. Inconceivable to even think of it. For a pious person, if calamity, no
other alternative than taking shelter of the Lord's lotus feet. Preparing for
liberation from birth and death. Welcome and appreciate. Opportunity to
remember the Lord. Boat for crossing the ocean of nescience as one leaps over
the holes made by the hooves of a calf. Monsoon, Goshala. Undisturbed as
calamities sure to happen. Suffering all sorts of unavoidable misfortunes. Good
or bad means favorable or unfavorable for Krishna Consciousness.

Spirit soul transcendental to all material so called calamities. Like tiger
swallowing men in dream. Unreal. Calamities or dangers, very good if remind us
of Kṛṣṇa. This (material) world is full of dangers. Tolerate. No diversion. No
other remedy. Foolish struggle for existing to avoid this. Material business.
Work hard, earn money, enjoy old life without working. No one wants to work.
Retire from work and become happy as soon as money available. Bodily concept of
life. Real danger, repetition of birth and death. Ocean, may have very strong
ship, but can never be safe, dangers at any time. Sharks. Titanic was safe, but
sank on first voyage. Many important men died. Instead, cross over this sea of
danger as soon as possible. Spiritual boat, ability to make material ocean
small. Not disturbed by the sea waves. Get out to the other side. Develop our
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, after giving up this body, may go back home, back to
Godhead.

London, sometimes chilly, taking morning bath a little difficult. Still,
regular bath, prescribed duty. Even if suffering. Tapasya, or austerity.
Proceed with our business (of Kṛṣṇa consciousness) despite all the dangers and
calamities of this world. Voluntary acceptance of difficulties of life. Chant,
dance, live peacefully, take kṛṣṇa-prasāda, be happy.

Devotee never disturbed by dangers, reverses, or calamities. Both dangers and
festivals are but Krishna's different demonstrations. Absolute. Vedic
literature, religion and irreligion, complete opposites, merely God's
front-back portions. Surrender Krishna. Remember Kṛṣṇa at dangerous times.
Prahlāda’s father putting him into dangerous predicaments, was always thinking
of Kṛṣṇa. Seeing or remembering Kṛṣṇa means advancing in spiritual life, not
have to suffer any more of these dangers. If comfortable, but at death, getting
a cat, dog or mouse body, no benefit. Enough money, food, good estate, ample
comforts. Body finished, no birth again, let me enjoy life. Modern philosophy
of hedonism. Not factual. Consciousness should be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought.

Pray: My Lord, Your great mercy, blessing, that I have been put into this
dangerous position. Because of past activities and deeds, meant to suffer very
much. But You are mitigating suffering and giving me only a little. By your
grace, only token punishment. I deserve a lot more.

Like high-court judge finding important men culprit. Able to give a fine of
thousand dollars or more, but fine greatly reduced and minimised as special
treatment. Or one destined for death, but instead of being killed with a knife,
get some little cut on the finger. Even if devotees have a history of very
grievous criminal activities behind, little cut. So, why fear?

Just utter dependence on Krishna. Intesense feeling. True benefit. Highest
gain. Careful. Before winning Kurukṣetra war, Pāṇḍavas put into many dangers.
Given poison, house of lac set afire, confronted with great man-eating demons.
Lost their kingdom, wife, prestige. Exiled to the forest. Throughout dangers,
Kṛṣṇa present. Supplying cloth to Draupadī, etc. Such pious devotees also
suffering. Not that become a devotee, no danger or suffering. Prahlāda and
Haridāsa Ṭhākura suffered greatly. 

Firm faith, conviction, Kṛṣṇa present, will give me protection. No benefit of
any shelter other than Kṛṣṇa. Always take to Kṛṣṇa. BG: My devotee is never
vanquished. Take and adhere to Kṛṣṇa consciousness under all circumstances,
even in the most dangerous position. Keep our faith in Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, and
there will be no danger.

Therefore, I should not lament on material challenges, like financial
challenges in London, business challenges at work, health or familial issues. I
should always remember Krishna and never Forget Him.

---

10. “The subject matter which attracts the dying man becomes the beginning of
his next life.” Based on how Bhismadeva left his body, present your views on,
“Life – An art of dying.”

SB-01.09.29-31 - BHISHMADEVA FINAL MOMENTS.mp3 -> From ~0:45

1.9.29

Benediction to die at his will. Auspicious time came. Wanted to move out.
Golden opportunity arrived. Sun’s course ran into the northern hemisphere. This
period is desired by mystics who die at will.

Perfect yogīs or mystics can leave the material body at their own sweet will at
a suitable time and go to a suitable planet desired by them. BG 8.24,
self-realized souls, exactly identified themselves with the interest of the
Lord, can generally leave the material body during the time of the fire-god’s
effulgence, when sun in the northern horizon, thus achieve the transcendental
sky. In the Vedas, these times auspicious for quitting the body, taken
advantage of. Different science, Bhīṣmadeva knew well how to utilize it.
Prepared himself to quit his body before the exalted Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the pious
Pāṇḍavas and the great sages headed by Bhagavān Vyāsa, etc., all great souls.

1.9.30

Spoke on different subjects with thousands of meanings, fought on thousands of
battlefields and protected thousands of men, stopped speaking, completely freed
from all bondage, withdrew his mind from everything else and fixed his
wide-open eyes upon Kṛṣṇa, standing before him, four-handed, dressed in yellow
garments that glittered and shined.

In the momentous hour of leaving his material body, Bhīṣmadeva set the glorious
example concerning the important function of the human form of life. If one is
absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, sure to go back to Godhead without any doubt.
Confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, 8.5-15.

He gave big seminars. Stopped everything. Focused all his thoughts, attention,
words, everything on Krishna. Mind mainly. Withdrawing senses. Sensory
functions not manifesting. Totally detached. Completely given his mind. Rapt in
his thought on some object at the time of his death, he will attain that object.
Prabhupada gives a series of verses. These are the way of living the body.

Śrī Bhīṣmadeva attained the perfection of quitting his body at will, was
fortunate enough to have Kṛṣṇa, the object of his attention, personally present
at the time of death. He therefore fixed his open eyes upon Him, wanted to
see Kṛṣṇa for a long time out of his spontaneous love for Him. He was a pure
devotee, very little to do with the detailed performance of yogic principles.
Not very much accepted. Simple bhakti-yoga enough to bring about perfection.
Bhīṣmadeva's ardent desire to see Kṛṣṇa's person, the most lovable object, and
by the Lord's grace, had this opportunity at the last stage of his breathing.

1.9.31

Pure meditation, looking at Kṛṣṇa, once was freed from all material
inauspiciousness, relieved of all bodily pains caused by the arrow wounds. All
the external activities of his senses at once stopped, prayed transcendentally
to the controller of all living beings while quitting his material body.

Bhīṣmadeva, illusion at once removed when Lord arrived. Like sun, illusory,
external material energy darkness. In sun's presence, no darkness stands. All
material contamination completely removed. Bhīṣmadeva able to be
transcendentally situated by stopping the activities of the impure senses in
collaboration with matter. Attained all these transcendental conditions prior
to his leaving the material body because of Lord’s presence. Provided all
facilities to fulfill the transcendental desires of His great devotee
Bhīṣmadeva, who prayed.

1.9.32

Bhīṣmadeva, statesman, head of the Kuru dynasty, great general, kṣatriya
leader, his mind was strewn over so many subjects, thinking, feeling and
willing engaged in different matters. To achieve pure devotional service,
wanted to invest all powers of thinking, feeling and willing entirely in Kṛṣṇa.
Described as the leader of the devotees and all-powerful. Pure devotees of the
Lord have no desire other than His service. Called sātvata. The Lord is the
chief amongst such sātvatas. Bhīṣmadeva had no other desires. Unless one
purified from all sorts of material desires, the Lord does not become one’s
leader. Desires cannot be wiped out, but have only to be purified.

Confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (10.10) by the Lord Himself that He gives His
instruction from within the heart of a pure devotee who is constantly engaged
in the Lord's service.

---

11. What general principles can we draw from Bhismadeva’s episode about

SB-01.09.01-11 - PANDAVAS VISIT BHISMADEVA.mp3 - from ~8:15min

(i) Welcoming guests

1.9.9

Bhīṣmadeva received and welcomed all the great and powerful ṛṣis assembled.
Knew perfectly all the religious principles according to time and place. Dharma
according to desa, kala, vibhavagit. Dharmajnah, knower of religious
principles. Not just theory, but also practice.

Expert religionists know perfectly how to adjust religious principles in terms
of time and place. All great ācāryas, religious preachers or reformers of the
world executed their mission by adjustment of religious principles in terms of
time and place. Shastra gives direction. He knows their import.
Guru-sadhu-shastra, also. Like Dhruva, take water. No metal deity, but clay, in
the forest.

There are different climates and situations in different parts of the world. If
one has to discharge one's duties to preach the Lord's message, one must be
expert in adjusting things in terms of the time and place. Maturity. Bhīṣmadeva
was one of the twelve great authorities in preaching this cult of devotional
service. He could receive and welcome all the powerful sages assembled at his
deathbed from all parts of the universe.

Certainly unable at that time to welcome and receive them physically. He was
neither at home nor in a normal healthy condition. But he was quite fit by the
activities of his sound mind. He could utter sweet words with hearty
expressions. All of them were well-received. One can perform one’s duty by
physical work, mind and words. Knew well how to utilize them in the proper
place. No difficulty to receive them, although physically unfit.

(ii) Power of time?

SB-01.09.12-17 - BHISMADEVA PACIFIES AND ENCOURAGES THE PANDAVAS.mp3 - From ~17:05
~27.45

1.9.14

All due to inevitable time, under whose control everyone in every planet
carried, as clouds by the wind.

Dependent. Any living entities, human beings, under the influence of time. From
beginning to end. Teachings of Lord Kapila. Maitreya. Only Krishna beyond.
Sunrise, sunset, time passes, one day. Changing seasons, circumstances, dealings.
Winter, wearing warm clothes. Summer, really hot, hard to stand. No influence
on pure devotees dedicated to Krishna-katha. Death, ultimate form of time. No
bewilderment.

Control by time all over the space and planets within the universe. Residents,
rulers, etc. All the big gigantic planets, including sun, controlled by the
force of air, as clouds carried by the force of air. Similarly, the inevitable
kāla, time, controls even the action of the air and other elements. Everything
controlled by the supreme kāla, the Lord's forceful representative within the
material world.  Yudhiṣṭhira should not be sorry for the inconceivable action
of time. Everyone has to bear the actions and reactions of time within the
conditions of the material world. Yudhiṣṭhira should not think that he had
committed sins in his previous birth and suffering the consequence. Even the
most pious has to suffer the condition of material nature. But pious men
faithful to Krishna. Guided by the bona fide brāhmaṇa and Vaiṣṇava following
the religious principles. These three guiding principles should be the aim of
life. One should not be disturbed by the tricks of eternal time. Even the great
controller of the universe, Brahmājī, also under the control of that time. End
of the day, has to sleep. End of his life, has to merge into Vishnu's body. One
should not grudge thus controlled by time despite a true follower of religious
principles.

1.9.15

Influence of inevitable time! Irreversible.

As far as the material or spiritual resources required, no scarcity in the
Pāṇḍavas' case. Materially, well-equipped. Two great warriors, namely Bhīma and
Arjuna. Spiritually, the King, symbol of religion. Above all, Kṛṣṇa, personally
concerned with their affairs as well-wisher. Yet, so many reverses on the
Pāṇḍavas's side. Despite the power of pious acts, personalities, expert
management and weapons under the direct supervision of Kṛṣṇa, Pāṇḍavas suffered
so many practical reverses, due to the influence of kāla, inevitable time. No
protection. Tribulations. Kāla is identical with the Lord Himself. The
influence of kāla indicates the inexplicable wish of the Lord Himself. No
lamentation when matter beyond the control of any human being. Problem, if we
can do something about it, why worry. If not, why worry. Accept the situations
as they are when arriving. Radhanath Maharaja, Krishna's mercy. 

---

12. “The best way to establish our relation in transcendental sweetness is to
approach Krsña through His recognized devotees.” (1.9.22P)

How can one apply this in one’s personal practice of Krsña consciousness?

=====

Module 2 (SB 1.10-19)

1. The Hastinäpura ladies’ words are glorified as “sarva sruti manoharam.” Çréla Prabhupäda comments, “Anything sung in praise of the Lord is a sruti mantra.” Write a brief note quoting çästric references about: (i) Devotional movies, audio albums and books by people not practicing Kåñëa consciousness, (ii) Kåñëa-kathä by a neophyte practitioner of Kåñëa consciousness.

2. “The ladies, who were all absorbed in the thought and actions of the Lord, developed the consciousness of Vedic wisdom by the grace of the Lord. And therefore although such ladies might not have been very learned scholars in Sanskrit or otherwise, still whatever they spoke was more attractive than the Vedic hymns.” (1.10.20P) How can one be fixed in bhakti and please the Lord more by simple prayers than by deep study of çästra? Why should one spend so much time studying the scriptures?

3. 1.13.10 describes devotees as the personification of holy places. Compare the purifying potency of a dhäma and a devotee, quoting relevant çästric references.

4. Vidura doesn’t reveal the truth about the Yadus to the Päëòavas even when he was asked for it. He reveals the naked truth of life to Dhåtaräñöra even when he did not ask for it. What do we learn from this behaviour? Discuss how to apply this in
our practice of bhakti? [OR]
“One should not become an instrument of spreading negativity.” Explain this based on relevant verses from 1.13 and discuss the implications of not following this in the life of a practicing devotee, both individually and institutionally.

5. Yudhiñöira Mahäräja was aggrieved for the (i) destruction that happened in the war, (ii) departure of Bhéñmadeva, (iii) uninformed retirement of his uncles and aunt, (iv) disappearance of Lord Kåñëa. Devotees counseled him in only two of these cases and not the other two. Discuss what could be inferred and learnt from this.

6. If Parékñit Mahäräja had killed Kali instead of forgiving him, we wouldn’t be suffering the affects of Kali now. If someone raises this argument, how would you comprehensively answer him?

7. Parékñit Mahäräja and many other personalities mentioned in Canto 1 were dealt with inappropriately, but tolerated it. 1.18.48 says that a devotee never retaliates. How do we apply this in our practical life? Does it mean that one should allow oneself to be exploited? Elaborate.

8. Çréla Prabhupäda writes in the purports of 1.13, “Great souls cheat for a great cause.” Elaborate on this principle based on some çästric example.

9. “The sane man should rather feel obliged to the Lord for such benefactions and must utilize such power for the service of the Lord.” (1.15.5P). How does one attribute the success of one’s activities to the mercy of the guru and Vaiñëavas? Choose a situation in your life, and attempt to connect different aspects of that situation to your superiors’ blessings in a concrete way.

10.After coming back to his palace, Parékñit Mahäräja contemplated on his behaviour with Çaméka Åñi. He expected and desired calamity upon himself for his insignificant mistake. What inspiration do you derive from his example?

=====

Module 3 (SB Canto 2)

1. Discuss the superiority of bhakti-yoga compared with other paths, based on çästric statements.

2. “Constant chanting of the holy name after the ways of great authorities is the doubtless and fearless way of success for all.” Identify the obstacles in your chanting and discuss how the study of this section of Bhägavatam helps you to overcome those obstacles.

3. How are Çukadeva Gosvämé’s descriptions of materialistic persons apparent in modern society? How would you convey this strong condemnation of materialistic life to a newcomer in the process?

4. Describe the right utility of one’s life based on the contents of 2.1-5, especially 2.1.13 and 2.3.17-24.

5. Collect statements by Çréla Prabhupäda describing the need for understanding the universal form of the Lord. Bring out practical application points from those statements.

6. Identify principles from Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé’s prayers that you would like to imbibe. Elaborate on how contemplating on his prayers prepares your consciousness to speak Bhägavatam.

7. In 2.3.15P, SP says, “...Mahäräja Parékñit was naturally inclined to Lord Kåñëa from his very childhood. He might have imitated either of the above-mentioned activities, and all of them establish his great devotion from his very childhood, a symptom of a mahä-bhägavata.” Present some practical ways to attract children towards Kåñëa.

8. Contrast Närada Muni’s questions in 2.5 with the modern inquiries into cosmology. What are the most striking features for you in Närada’s questions? State your understanding of what he stands to gain by asking them.
 
9. Identify ideal qualities of a guru, disciple, and their relationship from the characters of Parékñit, Çukadeva, Närada, Brahmä, and the Lord.

10. Lord Brahmä admits that he cannot understand Kåñëa (SB 2.6.35) and understanding Kåñëa is the way back to Godhead! (BG 4.9). Explain how to reconcile this and justify your endeavours in Kåñëa consciousness to understand Kåñëa. Base your answer on çästric references and statements by Çréla Prabhupäda and/or other äcäryas.

11. Discuss the importance of preserving and distributing the message of Çrémad-Bhägavatam with reference to 2.7.51-53. How is this mission relevant to you?

12. How does the catuù-çloké Bhägavatam explain sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana?

=====

Module 4 (SB 3.1-14)

1. “Value of discussions depends on the persons involved in them.” Elaborate on this theme referring to 3.1.4, its purport, and other contexts in the Vidura-Maitreya samväda and the entire Bhägavatam. How are Kåñëa conscious discussions relevant in the modern day?

2. Discuss the “disposion of a devotee in disturbances,” refering to Vidura’s response described in 3.1. Consider a personal experience where you failed to handle a disturbing situation. Share your reflections on how would you deal with such disturbances after learing from Vidura’s example.

3. “Generally, in old age a person is allowed retirement from mundane service. But in the transcendental service of the Lord... service attitude increases more and more with the progress of age.” (3.2.3P). Explain this concept of increase in service attitude irrespective of bodily constraints both with philosophical, scriptural and real-life examples.

4. In SB 3.4.21, Çréla Prabhupäda writes: “A pure devotee of the Lord of the standard of Uddhava constantly associates with the Lord in the double perception of simultaneous separation and meeting.” From your study of the commentaries by SP and VCT, explain how Uddhava experienced union in separation from the Lord.

5. Explain how to understand the apparent contradictions in the inconceivable pastimes of Lord Kåñëa narrated in 3.3-4.

6. Present your reflections on the Lord’s purpose behind material creation.

7. Does 3.6.36 say that “one becomes unchaste if not engaged in devotional service?” How do you present this to a newcomer or a non-practitioner of bhakti?

8. Based on the purport to 3.6.37, explain how the “inactive” activity of hearing is far beyond liberation. Justify this for (i) a practitioner and (ii) a philanthropist.

9. “The living entity is in distress regarding his self-identity. He has no factual background, like a man who dreams that he sees his head cut off.” (3.7.10). How do you make use of this theoretical understanding in tolerating pain in personal life and comforting others in their pain? Do you recommend this concept to be conveyed to a non-devotee? If yes, how do you present your thoughts to him?

10. Does the incident of Paräçara Muni (3.8) reveal that forgiveness is a qualification to receive and speak Çrémad-Bhägavatam? Elaborate on this. Also, explore Çréla Prabhupäda’s purports, for the necessity of obtaining one’s superior’s blessings to properly speak on Bhägavatam. What are the actual consequences of speaking without blessings? Give practical examples.

11. “Nature’s beauty is a perverted reflection of the Lord’s beauty.” (3.8.24P). How do we convey this in an amiable way to the nature lovers?

12. Discuss the importance of prayers for protection from fall- down, refering to Çréla Prabhupäda’s purport on 3.9.24.

13. “The service of Brahmä is the sample of service in liberation distinguished from the so-called altruistic services full of mistakes and forgetfulness. Liberation is never inaction, but service without human mistakes.” (2.2.1P)
“A pure devotee of the Lord like Brahmä and those in his line of disciplic succession always desire that the Lord be known all over the universe by each and every one of the living entities. That desire of the devotee is always blessed by the Lord.” (3.9.39P)
How do these statements inspire you (a follower of the Brahma- Madhva-Gauòéya sampradäya) in the service of spreading Kåñëa consciousness on behalf of the Lord?

14. Lord Brahmä continued his service in spite of all obstacles – dissatisfaction in creating the ajïäna-våttis, disobedience of the Kumäras, disturbance by Çiva’s followers, distraction by Väk and deficiency in the sages’ performace (3.12). How does this improve your determination in devotional service?

15. “Maitreya hesitated to state this anomaly on the part of Brahmä... If Brahmä could be a victim of the sexual urge, then what of others...” (3.12.28P). Is it correct for a subordinate to correct one’s superior? Support your answer with çästric references.

16. Discuss the importance of “hearing about devotees” refering to 3.13.4. Share some personal experiences on how hearing about other devotees helped you in your practice of bhakti.

17. By which qualities was Manu able to please his father and spiritual master? Which of these qualities strikes you the most? How would you like to imbibe them in your life? Why was the Kumäras’ disobedience acceptable? Discuss.

18. “An ordinary man’s mistake may ruin his life, but Diti’s mistake disturbed the whole universe.” Present your reflections on our responsibility as devotees of Kåñëa and
followers of Çréla Prabhupäda as we grow “older” in bhakti.

19. Why could Kaçyapa not resist Dité’s advances? What could/should he have done in that circumstance? Discuss an example in your personal life when you allowed spontaneous feelings to override reasoning. What is the role of repentence in rectifying the situation?

=====

Module 5 (SB 3.15-33)

1. What were the causes of Jaya and Vijaya’s stopping the four Kumäras? Relate this to our tendency to judge others on externals.

2. Identify lessons on resolving conflicts based on the way Lord Näräyaëa brought out the best side of the Kumäras and Jaya- Vijaya.

3. The äcäryas interpret the blasphemous words of demons as glorification of the Lord (e.g. Varähadeva episode). How do you explain this to a new reader of scripture who may question this as a “biased” or “non-as it is” interpretation of the scriptural words? How is it different from the Mäyävädéc misinterpretation of scriptural words?

4. The four Kumäras were transformed from the impersonal conception to the personal. How does this incident help you in preaching?

5. What inspiration and instruction does the description of the kingdom of God give to the struggling sädhakas who aspire to go there? Elaborate.

6. “A wrong act committed by a servant leads people in general to blame his master, just as a spot of white leprosy on any part of the body pollutes all of the skin.” (3.16.5P). The Lord took responsibility for his servants’ mistake. Identify principles for personal application from this episode, in one’s roles as (i) a servant and (ii) a leader.

7. Describe the modern demoniac attitudes toward God with reference to the example of Hiraëyäkña.

8. Çréla Prabhupäda relates natural disturbances with the increase of demoniac population. How do you explain this to people in general with evidence?

9. Kardama did penance for 10,000 years and asked the Lord for a suitable wife. And after impregnating his wife, he was ready to renounce immediately. What do you learn from this behaviour of Kardama Muni?

10. What principles for personal application may we learn from Devahüti’s regretful words of not taking advantage of the saintly association of Kardama Muni?

11. What should be the behaviour of a disciple towards his spiritual master? Present your learnings form the examples of Devahüté and Manu.

12. “The Lord is described by the word viviktädhyätma-darçanaù. If anyone can completely perceive another’s distress without doubt, it is the Lord Himself.” (3.20.28). Does this help you deal with misunderstandings while serving in the association of devotees? Elaborate.

13. The Lord is referred to as the quick bestower of all blessings (SB 3.21.7) despite appearing to Kardama Muni only after 10,000 years of austerities. Relate this point to a sädhaka to cultivate enthusiasm, determination and patience.

14. How do the verses describing the form of the Lord in 3.28 prepare your consciousness for taking daily darçana of the deities?

15. “If we depend on the choice of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, we will receive benedictions in greater opulence than we desire.” (3.21.28). Elaborate in your own words.

16. Worshiping the deities with reverence, but disrespecting the devotees is criticized by Lord Kapila. How, then, do we avoid disrespect in our dealings with co-sädhakas whose activities may not be perfect?

17. How do you communicate the facts of materialistic family life, presented by Lord Kapila, to the modern man of Kali-yuga?

=====

Module 6 (SB 4.1-14)

1. Identify the conflicting roles of Saté and derive principles for personal application for a sädhaka from her behaviour.

2. Comment on the current situation of the world in relation to Nandi’s curses.

3. What analogy does SP give in 4.2 on the redundancy of demigod worship? How will you communicate this to a newcomer?

4. What do we learn from Dakña’s behaviour about the ill effects of uncontrolled anger in 4.2? What do we learn from Lord Çiva’s response?

5. Select a verse from Lord Brahmä’s conversation with Lord Çiva and explain how it could be (mis)used to prove that Lord Çiva is the Supreme. Explain the consequences of such use.

6. How will you apply the principle of forgiveness explained in 4.6 in your personal life as a sädhaka?

7. Comment on Närada’s and Sunéti’s expertize in directing Dhruva’s energy and passion towards Kåñëa. What principles can we derive from this example in inspiring new people to take to bhakti?

8. Dhruva Mahäräja rejected Närada’s initial instructions and accepted the next set of instructions. Analyze the difference between them and comment.
 
9. Dhruva Mahäräja went back home, back to Godhead in spite of performing devotional service with material motives. Explain the possible usage of this example in preaching to newcomers.

10. Although speechless at the first darçana of the Lord, Dhruva was empowered by the Lord to offer prayers. What inspiration may one derive from this to speak on Bhägavatam?

11. Support SP’s statements in implementing Närada Muni’s instructions to Dhruva, in the west. How may we apply them in our preaching?

12. “I am crippled in many ways, if one of my disciples becomes as strong as Dhruva Mahäräja, then he will be able to carry me with him to Vaikuëöhaloka.” Present your thoughts and learnings on reading this statement by Çréla Prabhupäda.

13. Dhruva Mahäräja remembered mother Sunéti before boarding the Vaikuëöha airplane. Explain this principle of gratitude in your own words, quoting other çästric examples.

14. Does Vena’s episode show the superiority of brähmaëas over kñatriyas? Explain. Comment on the current world situation of the brähmaëas and administrators.

=====

Module 7 (SB 4.15-31)

1. Derive supporting statements from the conversation between mother earth and Påthu Mahäräja and explain the need for farm communities.

2. You have been asked by a publishing company to write a foreword for a book entitled, “10 Steps to Perfect Leadership.” Derive ancient principles from the character and activities of Påthu Mahäräja’s and show their relevance to the modern audience.

3. Give reference for the glory of hearing from a pure devotee from Påthu Mahäräja’s prayers. How does Çréla Prabhupäda’s purports in this episode help you contemplate on your –
a. Personal experience of getting connected to ISKCON through hearing from a devotee and/or reading SP’s books.
b. Current experience (at Bhaktivedänta Vidyäpéöha) of regular study and hearing.

4. If great souls are satisfied by their own acts and if trying to repay them makes one a joker, what inspires you to serve devotees?

5. What general principles can a sädhaka derive from Påthu Mahäräja’s unwillingness to accept praise?
6. “There is a great need to propagate the Kåñëa consciousness movement in the world so that even though people sometimes become angry and malicious toward one another, because of their being Kåñëa conscious such rivalry, competition and envy can be adjusted without difficulty.” (4.20.18P). What could be the possible causes of difficulty in Vaiñëava relationships, and what sacrifices may be required in order to maintain these relationships?

7. “Every man’s duty is to receive orders from Lord Kåñëa or from His bona fide representative and take these orders as his life and soul, without personal considerations.” What is the mature and immature usage of this statement for a practicing sädhaka? Elaborate.

8. “Kåñëa gives more credit to His devotees than He takes for Himself.” Mention at least five examples of this. How does it inspire you to be more selfless? What in your opinion could be the possible pitfalls in artificially or immaturely adopting this kind of behaviour?

9. How does Çréla Prabhupäda explain the word “madireksana”? How does this explanation inspire you to refer to Rudra-géta?

10. From the episode of Närada enlightening Präcénabarhi through the allegorical story, how do you understand that the Supreme Lord is eager for reunion with the conditioned souls? What lessons does this episode give about one’s duty as a conditioned soul?

11. What is the real benediction of Lord Çiva? How do you communicate it to a staunch worshiper of Lord Çiva?

12. As a young practitioner of Kåñëa consciousness, who has no experience of Jarä’s association, but having studied of her nature, how do you communicate the importance of practicing Kåñëa consciousness to your old grandfather?

13. 4.30.8 informs us that the Lord is pleased with friendly relations among the devotees, and SP defines “real unity” in the purport. How does this inspire you to “co-operate” with the devotees?

=====

Module 8 – Canto 5

1. “Obstacles can’t obstruct absorption.” Refer to the purport of 5.1.5 (Priyavrata’s episode) and discuss how the apparent impediments to devotional service created by the Lord’s will – (i) will not make one loose one’s advancement, (ii) will even increase one’s vigor to practice devotional service. Back up your answer with other çästric examples.

2. “When a devotee achieves what he wants to accomplish, it is not by his own mystic power but by the grace of the master of mystic power, Lord Kåñëa: by His grace, a devotee can accomplish wonderful things unimaginable even to the most powerful scientist.” (5.1.30P). What could be the possible ways in which a newcomer reacts upon hearing this statement? Discuss and give explanations wherever needed.

3. Discuss, with säçtric examples, the inconceivable nature of the acts performed by the Supreme Lord (5.4) and His devotees (5.1.30-35).

4. How does one reconcile, with one’s logic and intelligence, the descriptions given in the Vedic literatures such as “Priyavrata Mahäräja ruled for eleven arbuda years” and his “three sons became the Manus of the 3rd, 4th and 5th manvantara periods”?

5. Discuss the ultimate purpose of performing the Vedic sacrifices referring to the episodes of King Näbhi (5.3) and Bharata Mahäräja (5.7).

6. Mention any five points about the “nature of the mind” from various sections in Canto 5, and elaborate on them. Discuss how the mind is the cause of falling down in one’s practice of bhakti. How do saintly people deal with the mind? Quote other çästric references and examples.

7. Draw general principles from Bharata Mahäräja’s fall-down and discuss the relevance of those principles in your own practice of Kåñëa consciousness.

8. Draw general principles from the incident of goddess Kälé killing her worshipers to save a Vaiñëava. How will you communicate this to people in general? Cite similar çästric examples.

9. Quote your favourite set of instructions by Jaòa Bharata to King Rahügaëa and derive principles for personal application for a sädhaka.

10. Discuss what lessons the modern administrators may learn from King Gaya’s character.

11. Is Rahügaëa’s chastisement of Jaòa-Bharat really a serious offense, as he did not know who Jaòa-Bharat was, and only spoke harsh words in the heat of the moment? If so, what precautions could one take to avoid committing offenses unknowingly or circumstantially? If not, explain.

12. Referring to the glories of mother Gaìgä, present your thoughts about the pollution of mother Ganges, the importance of preserving the Ganges River and the steps to be taken in this regard. How do you explain the spiritual nature of mother Gaìgä to the devotees and the general public?

13. Draw general principles for preaching and personal application from the glories of Bhärata-varña (5.17-19). How will you communicate the glory of human birth in India to a non- practitioner of Kåñëa consciousness?

14. What is the significance of hearing/studying the universal structure from Çrémad-Bhägavatam? Why do you think this is inquired into and explained in Çrémad-Bhägavatam?

15. Give parallels between the forest of material enjoyment (allegorical story) and the modern day situation (5.13-14).

16. Write your realizations on how the study of cosmology has increased your faith in the power and glory of Lord Kåñëa.

17. How do you communicate to the modern day people about the existence of different planets filled with different varieties of living entities within our universe? (5.16-26)

18. How do we understand the descriptions of the different punishments given in different hellish planets and how do we communicate these details to modern day people?

=====

Module 9 – Canto 6.1-9

1. Parékñit was compassionate to conditioned souls despite having only a few more days to live. To what extent may a sädhaka imbibe this spirit? Discuss.

2. Present your understanding of the futility of the processes of karma and jïäna compared to bhakti. Give other çästric references.

3. Ajämila saw an uncommon sight and got affected. In Kali-yuga such sights have become commonplace. What, then, in your understanding, could be the protection for the practitioners who spread Kåñëa consciousness?

4. “Ajämila performed many sinful activities. By allowing him to get away without experiencing a reaction for the pain he caused his young wife, elderly parents, people from whom he stole, etc., a great injustice is done.” How would you reply if someone argues like this?

5. Identify principles for personal application for a sädhaka from Ajämila’s repentance and determination. Discuss the significance of “a second chance” in the life of a sädhaka. Give personal examples, if any.

6. “We would simply have performed saìkértana, but then the inhabitants of Våndävana would not have taken the installation ceremony seriously.” (6.3.26P). Give examples of various arrangements that we need to make, as a movement, to help connect and attract people to Kåñëa consciousness.

7. “Çréla Jéva Gosvämé says that although saìkértana is sufficient for the perfection of life, the arcana, or worship of the Deity in the temple, must continue in order that the devotees may stay clean and pure. Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura therefore recommended that one follow both processes simultaneously.” (6.3.26P). Explore the role of Deity worship in the life of a sädhaka.

8. (i) The potency of the holy name can nullify sinful reactions. (ii) Chanting the holy name for nullifying one’s sinful reactions is an offense. (iii) Committing sins with an expectation that the holy name will nullify one’s reactions is an offense. What questions could these statements create in one’s mind? How would you try to reconcile them based on your current understanding?

9. Present the mood of a bona fide spiritual authority based on Yamaräja’s talk with the Yamadütas.

10. Relate the example of Ajämila to the major theme of Canto 6, “poñaëa.”

11. What inspiration did you derive from Närada Muni’s preaching spirit with patience and tolerance? Write an article, referring to Çré Närada Muni’s allegory to Dakña’s sons for a teenage audience.

12. How do you balance efficiency and etiquette? Give relevant examples.

13. Requirements for two different bona fide services of the Lord could contradict one another. Do you agree with this? If so, elaborate, quoting relevant examples. If not, explain why.

14. Explain the importance of acting appropriately at the right time, with relevant examples.

15. Draw general principles from the examples of Indra offending Båhaspati, and the demons worshiping Çukräcärya.

16. Indra regrets his mistakes, but again commits mistakes. This tendency is often seen in struggling sädhakas too. Is such regret useless or beneficial? Discuss.

17. Identify preaching application points from the prayers of the demigods with material motives.

=====

Module 10 – Canto 6.10-19

1. Identify principles behind a devotee using his body “properly” in Kåñëa’s service, referring to Dadhéci’s example.

2. How does Våträsura’s character signify faith in the Lord’s will? Elaborate.

3. Compare the characters of Indra and Våträsura on the battlefield.

4. Draw general principles from Våträsura’s instructions to Indra.

5. What principles do you identify from Indra’s unhappiness after achieving his goal of killing Våträsura?

6. Contrast the consciousness of the devatäs and Våträsura when confronted with difficulty. How can we cultivate the values of pure bhakti despite encountering difficulties from outside and inside?

7. Comment on the following statement from Citraketu’s pastime:
“Both material attachment and material despair cause deep bewilderment for the living entity.” Elaborate based on different characters involved in this pastime.

8. Explain the rarity of a devotee, referring to 6.14.5. Write your feelings on your current status as a practicing devotee in the association of devotees.

9. Citraketu, although having all opulences, was distressed due to lack of a son. What message(s) did you take from this?

10. Discuss on the theme of “Intervention of a sädhu in one’s life,” with the example of Citraketu and your personal life.

11. “Harña-çoka” means “the cause of both happiness and distress!” What message does this name give us about the nature of this material world?

12. The co-wives of Kåtadyuti became envious. Is someone else responsible for this? If not, how does one safeguard himself from the influence of ill feelings? If yes, how should one be careful not to behave in ways that instigate ill feelings in others?

13. What care should one take while giving suggestions/corrections to others? Elaborate with relevant examples.

14. Explain the disposition of a devotee in reversals with the example of Citraketu. How would you apply them in your personal life?

15. Extract lessons on dealings between superiors and subordinates from various episodes of Canto 6. What are the consequences of breaching etiquette?

16. Comment on Kaçyapa’s expertize as a guru in purifying Diti of her envy. How do you apply this example in helping others who might seek your help in fulfilling their selfish desires?

17. Compare Kaçyapa’s dealings with Diti in 3.14 and 6.18 and bring out practical lessons.
