Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P79dswRi9ds
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_161_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_17_%26_18_-_Bhava_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&event=video_description&v=P79dswRi9ds&redir_token=AAUE0Rzg9WApFVAIGhfxmey1mpd8MTU0ODQ5MDYyMUAxNTQ4NDA0MjIx

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our Bhakti Shastri course. Now, we are moving
from, you know, sadhana-bhakti to bhava-bhakti. So, you know, the eastern ocean,
waves inside the ocean has multiple waves. So, sadhana-bhakti. There is, there
is, generally, the first introduction to bhakti is there. Then, there is
sadhana-bhakti. Then, there is bhava-bhakti. And there is prema-bhakti. You
know. So, in sadhana-bhakti, there was "vaidhi-bhakti". And there was
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, the major chunk of the wave of sadhana-bhakti was
"vaidhi-bhakti". You know. There are a few chapters about "rāgānugā-bhakti".
Now, we are moving down to bhava-bhakti. So, bhava-bhakti seva, Prabhupada
translates as ecstatic love. You know. So, Chapter 17 and 18 are about
bhava-bhakti. And Chapter 19, you know, you know, which will be the last chapter
we discussed, will be, you know, prema-bhakti. You know. You know. So, let us
look at bhava-bhakti. You know. So, you know:

"By the process of executing regulated devotional service"

That is sadhana-bhakti.

"one is actually elevated to the transcendental stage, beyond the material modes
of nature."

You know. And then, gradually, as a devotee advances, Prabhupada says that the
devotee comes to the platform of "uttama-adhikārī", attains perfect devotion.
And then, Srila Prabhupada uses some interesting terms over here. Which we need
to understand.

"Within the stage of the regulative principles of devotional service there are
two divisions – namely, executive and effective. "

So, let us see what this "executive and effective" means. So, here, we will go
back to the waves of devotion. You know. You know. You know. So, here, we start
with Chapter 17. Let us look at the definition of, you know, "bhava-bhakti". So:

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā
        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk
        rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-
        kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

So, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, "śuddha-sattva" is pure goodness.
"viśeṣātmā". So, you know, the, you know, you know, nature. So, "ātmā" can refer
to the soul. But "ātmā" can also refer to nature. So, because we have a
spiritual nature. "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā".
"prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk". "prema-sūryāṁśu". So, you know, "sūrya" is sun.
"aṁśu" is a ray. So, "sūryāṁśu" refers to a ray of the sun. So, here, there is
an implicit metaphor. "prema". Love for Krishna. Which is the final stage. This
is bhava. This is penultimate stage. You know. So, "bhava-sūryāṁśu", sorry,
"prema-sūryāṁśu". So, "prema" is like the Sun. And, you know, "bhava" is like
the, you know, ray of the sun. "sāmya-bhāk". "sāmya-bhāk" means similar to.
"rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-". "rucibhiś". "rucibhiś" means there are variou...,
"ruci" is taste. There are various tastes that is, manifest in the heart of such
a devotee. And "citta-masṛṇya-". "masṛṇya" is there is softness of the heart
that comes up by this. "kṛd asau". That which causes "bhāva ucyate". So, what is
"bhāva"? "bhāva" is that, let us look at this one by one answer here now. So:

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā
        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk
        rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-
        kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

"śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, when there is pure goodness, you know,
"śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". That which has the characteristic of pure goodness.
That is the first line. The second line is "sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk". That which is
like the ray of sun. And then, "citta-masṛṇya-". There is so..., softness of the
heart that results. Along with various stage. "rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-". So, let
us look at these one by one now. So, with the first point that is mentioned,
"śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". Now, what, we know the word "sattva". "sattva" is
goodness. So, there are three modes. There is "tama". "raja". And "sattva". We
have discussed this elaborately in our Bhagavad Gita, especially in Chapter 14.
So, now, "sattva" and "śuddha-sattva" are different. Because "sattva" is still
material. "śuddha-sattva" is transcendental. "śuddha" means pure.
Uncontaminated. So, in this world, even goodness is considered contaminated.
Because still, it is a material mode. "śuddha-sattva" is not material. It is
transcendental. And in "śuddha-sattva", there are two characteristics. What are
those two characteristics? You know. Krishna has many internal energies, also.
So, among them, two primary energies are "saṁvit". And "hlādinī". Which are
relevant over here. "saṁvit". "saṁvit" means, "vit" means knowledge. "saṁvit"
means that which gives knowledge. You know. The knowledge potency of the Lord.
And "hlādinī" is pleasure. So, actually, that pleasure is not just sensual
pleasure. That is devotional pleasure. So, that which gives pleasure through
love. And that which gives knowledge for love. That is "saṁvit". And "hlādinī".
Now, "śuddha-sattva" is said to be composed of these two character..., two. In
fact, if we see, you know, that even "sattvaa", you know, is having two
characteristics. There is "jñāna-saṅgena cānagha":

        sukha-saṅgena badhnāti
        jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

When Krishna talks about the, introduces the three modes of material nature. And
He talks about goodness. He says it as through characteristics. There is
"sukha". And there is "jñāna". And because both are these material. Both of
these are material. Material knowledge. And material happiness. So, they bind
the soul to material existence.

        sukha-saṅgena badhnāti
        jñāna-saṅgena cānagha

So, now, when we talk about this, you know, in pure goodness. So, there is,
there is pure happiness. And there is pure knowledge. So, the pure knowledge is
the knowledge about Krishna. So, when "śuddha-sattva" is manifested, what
happens is, the devotee's heart becomes illumined with knowledge about Krishna.
And that knowledge, there is cog..., you know, we can say cognition. And
affection. We want to use other words. So, "hlād...", "saṁvit-shakti" is
cognition potency. And "hlādinī-shakti" is affection potency. That affection
naturally being satisfaction. Now, if, whenever we want to do anything. You
know. Suppose, a person wants to, say, play a, you know, sitar. Now, what all
are required? First of all, there is knowledge that is required. Ok. How is
sitar to be played? Then, there is something, there is the instrument. The sitar
has, sitar has, also has to be, that we played. And then, after that, there has
to be, you know, you know, you know, the person should have the desire to play.
And that desire comes when there is some sort of pleasure. Either that person
enjoys playing it. Or that person nat..., wants to play for somebody else. And
that person will appreciate. Or that person will pay. Or whatever. So, there is
some sort of, you know, desire which binds the person. That is, that we could
call roughly as affection. So, we get, do that. And we get some pleasure. So, in
any activity that we do, there is knowledge of how to do it. There is the
facility for doing it. And then, there is the, you know, there is the attraction
to do it. There is affection for doing it. Which may be because we like it in
itself. Or because we like something that we will get by that activity. So,
these three shaktis can be understood thus. That they are integral to any
activity that we do, even in the material world. So, "saṁvit" means the
knowledge of how to do something. So, for example, now, we are having this
online course. So, somebody wants to join the course, does not know much about
internet. So, first is, one has to have knowledge. Ok. How, how do I go to a
particular site? How do I turn on the video? Whatever. Then, after that, there
is, you know. there is "hlādinī". Ok. I, sorry, "saṁv...", that is "saṁvit". I
have to know. And then, there is "sandhinī". "sandhinī" is that which provides
the facility. Ok. Then, I have to have some internet connection. I have to have
some device. Which plays audio. Or video. And then, after that, there has to be
the "hlādinī". Ok. If I am doing something, actually, I get some pleasure out of
it. Otherwise, I will not do it. And there is some, generally, when, when, how
do we get a pleasure out of something? When there is some sort of relationship.
We like something about that thing, then we get pleasure. So, now, the, all
this, these examples are material. But in the spiritual world, you know, you
know, when we say that, thta there is pure love. And pure happiness. How does
that love and happiness come about? That is by Krishna's special mercy. And, but
that, Krishna's special mercy, you know, is not just "amorphous". Krishna's
mercy is personal. You know. So, all these three are actually Krishna's mercy,
only. You know. "saṁvit". "sandhinī". "hlādinī" are all Krishna's mercy. And
they all enable us to serve Him better. And better. You know. You know.

So, "saṁvit" is the shakti which is the, which knowledge-giving potency. Then,
in the "sandhinī", the facilities which are there. So, that is not directly
relevant to "śuddha-sattva". The facilities are there. Even the facilities in
the material world can be used for serving Krishna. You know. We can, we can
have a land. And we can build a temple over there. You know. We have our tongue.
And we can use it to glorify Krishna. So, the facilities are there anyway in the
material world. What needs to be chaned is, our knowledge of how they are meant
to be used. And the, you know, affection that we have. The attraction that we
have. We redirect it from the things of this world to the Lord who is beyond
the world. To the transcendental Lord. So, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". At the
stage of "bhāva-bhakti", one's knowledge. And one's affection. One's cognition.
And one's affection are redirected from matter to spirit. Not just spirit in
terms of "brahmayoti". But spirit in terms of the supreme spiritual reality.
Krishna. And when this happens, "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". So, just as one is
spontaneously attracted towards worldly things, and delights in world things. In
the sat..., in the conditioned stage, similarly, in the stage of "bhāva-bhakti",
one is attracted towards Krishna. And one delights in Krishna.

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

Then:

        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk

So, "prema-sūryāṁśu". That it is like a ray of the sun. "Rūpa Gosvāmī" also uses
the word "prema-ankur". "ankur means seed. Just like from a seed, the whole
tree blossoms. So, like that, this is the seed of love of God. And, you know,
"ankur". From here, the love of God will manifest. Soon. "sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk".
It is similar in quality. So, actually, between "bhāva" and "prema", there is
qualitative identity. But there is a difference in quantitative intensity. You
know. Ray of light can also give some illumination. Some warmth. But it is a
very tiny, you know, level of warmth that we get. But when there is, you know,
the full sun, then the amount of light that one gets from it is enormous. It is
complete..., it is complete illumination that comes by that. So, like that, you
know, now, when we say that, at the level of "bhāva", there is the this, that,
essential is the emotions that we are experiencing are pure spiritual. Rich.
They are connected with Krishna. But at the same time, the intensity is not as
much. Now, we may think that, ok, as compared to a sun, you know, sun is so
vast. And one ray is so small. So, then, "bhāva" is nothing very great. No.
"bhāva" is a very exalted stage. It is actually the stage beyond, way, way
beyond "anartha-nivṛttiḥ". "niṣṭhā". "ruciḥ". "āsaktiḥ". "bhāva". It is just
before "prema". It is a very, very exalted stage. And from the perspective of
"prema", it is lesser. But from our perspective, it is very exalted. And, so,
Prabhupada calls it, this level, also, as the level of "uttama-adhikārī". Now,
"prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk". And then, after that, it is described "rucibhiś
citta-masṛṇya-". "rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-" means one gets, you know, taste. And
then, that, when different kinds of taste one gets. And the heart becomes very
soft. Soft means what? That whenever there are any devotional stimuli.
Immediately, the devotee becomes, you know, flooded with devotional emotions.
The classic example of this is Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. You know. He would
just see, somewhere, you know, some river, and he would think, oh, this is
Yamuna. And want to go, run. And jump into that river. And get the sangha of,
you know, Krishna through His beloved river. Yamuna Devi. So, the
"citta-masṛṇya-". of course, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is not at the level of
"bhāva". He said the highest level of "prema". But I am just giving an example
of softness of heart over here. To understand the concept. "citta-masṛṇya-". And
then, at that stage, when this happens, then "kṛd asau bhāva ucyate". "kṛd
asau". The, when these things happen, then that is called as "bhāva". You know.
So, let us look at this a little bit more now. Now, how can "bhāva" be invoked?
So, Prabhupada writes, there is, as I read this over there:

"Within the stage of the regulative principles of devotional service there are
two divisions – namely, executive and effective."

So, you know, you know, so, here, Prabhupada is re..., using the words
"effective". And "exe...", "executive". So, executive refers to sadhana.
"sadhana-bhakti". And "bhāva" refers to effective. Why? Because we have to, in
the stages, stage of, you know, sadhana-bhakti, we are executing devotional
service. We are practicing devotional service. So that by the practice of
devotional service, we move forward. In our gra..., spiritual life. Gradually.
And then, there is effective. Effective means that which is, you know, you know,
that which is the effect. So that Prabhupada is using the word "effective" here
in a slightly different sense. Normally, effective, we use to say that, ok, it,
it produces the effect. But here, Srila Prabhupada uses the word, it is the
effect. So, what is the effect? The effect is "bhāva". So, by the practice of
sadhana-bhakti, "bhāva-bhakti" will come. By the practice of sadhana-bhakti,
which is the executive part of bhakti, we execute sadhana-bhakti. And by that,
the effect manifests. That is "bhāva-bhakti". So, now, when "bhāva-bhakti"
manifests. And "bhāva-bhakti" is practiced. "bhāva-bhakti" is done, that can be
done in multiple ways. So, let us look at this over here. So, "bhāva-bhakti",
so, "uttama-bhakti", which is actually, it can be "cesta-rupa". And
"bhāva-rupa". "cesta-rupa" means by endeavors. And by emotions. So, I shall
explain this. "cesta-rupa". Srila Prabhupada talks about it, you know, in his
purp..., in his, you know, summary study, also. And we will see how it will be 
mentioned. And in "cesta-rupa", there is sadhana. And there is sadhya. Sadhana
is endeavors that cause "bhāva". And endeavors that are the effect of "bhāva".
So, endeavors that cause "bhāva". That is sadhana. And sadhya is that endeavors
that are the effect of "bhāva". So, here, Srila Prabhupada is essentially
talking, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is essentially talking about the different
categories. In which, we can experience "bhāva-bhakti". So, "cesta-rupa" means
one is endeavoring. And one, at that stage, what it, what, that endeavor is not
exactly like material endeavor that a person does to get material results. No.
It is an entirely different category of endeavor. It is, actually, one already
has very rich intense emotions for Krishna. Do you remember? This is already
something which is achieved after "rāgānugā-bhakti". And at "rāgānugā" itself,
one has spontaneous devotion. So, this is more advanced than that. So, it is
certainly very special. So, here, "cesta-rupa" essentially refers to, you know,
so, this, Srila Prabhupada uses this word "cesta-rupa" to explain, you know, you
know, that one does "cesta" by which "bhāva" is developed. Or one does "cesta"
after "bhāva" is developed. That means there is the external aspect. And
internal aspect. So, the emotions are primary, then it is "bhāva-rupa". And
then, "cesta-rupa" means the endeavors. The actions are primary. But either way,
the imp..., important point is that this is all "bhāva-bhakti". Now, moving
forward, so, the primary characteristic is, so, if we go back to the definition.

        śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā
        prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk

So, like we discussed earlier, the, you know, the primary characteristic. And
the secondary characteristic. The "svarūpa-lakṣaṇa". And "taṭastha-lakṣaṇa". So,
the primary characteristic is "śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā". That there is the
descent of the mode of goodness. And then, "citta-masṛṇya-". That there is
softening of the heart, is the secondary characteristic. So, these are both the
characteristics of "bhāva-bhakti". You know. Now, how does "bhāva-bhakti"
develop? So, now, there are, actually, now, "rucibhiś", "rucibhiś
citta-masṛṇya-". So, what are these three typos of "ruci"? There is
"prapti-abhilasa". "anukulya-abhilasa". And "sauharda-abhilasa". So, let us look
at these one by one. "prapti-abhilasa". You know. That is the desire to achieve
Krishna. So, one has not yet come in the association of Krishna until now. But
one feels deeply, you know, attached. You know. The "abhilasa". Desire is
something which is a, little bit, you know, it is not a, it is, we have so many
desires. But aspiration is a much deeper. It is a clo..., it is a desire that is
very close to our hearts. It is a cherished desire. That is the, normally, the
way word "abhilasa" is used. In English, the best translation of "abhilasa" is
aspiration. I aspire for doing something. So, if that, what we aspire for is
normally something very great. Very wonderful. And then, we hold it at a high
pedestrian in our heart. And we cherish it. So, there is "prapti-abhilasa".
There is the desire to attain Krishna. Then, there is "anukulya-abhilasa". That
is the desire to, you know, please Krishna. So, now, the desire to please
Krishna, you know, we can say that it is always there.

        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ ...

That right from the beginning itself, there is "ānukūlya". There is the desire
to, you know, "bhāva-bhakti" is that which involves activity for pleasing
Krishna. That is true. But here, the realisation of Krishna is much mo...,
deeper. You know. One is able to perceive Krishna as a person. And as a person,
one wants to do things that will please Krishna. So, "anukulya-abhilasa". And
then, there is "sauharda-bhilasa". "sauharda-abhilasa" means one wants to keep
Krishna close to the heart. One does not want the thoughts to go away from
Krishna. One does not want to forget Krishna at all. Earlier, we see that, yes,
one, as a rule, one tries to avoid forgetting of Krish..., forgetting Krishna.
Which is good. But here, one moves forward. And to a deeper realm.
Where "sauharda-abhilasa". One has a very cherished desire. That let Krishna
always be very close to my heart. Let He never go away from my heart. Now, after
this, Srila Prabhupada writes in the purport in his summary study:

"After the outward appearance of these ecstatic symptoms, they stay within the
mind, and continuation of the ecstasy is called samādhi."

You know. You know. So, "bhāva" means what? Externally, the symptoms appear. And
then, just like the example is given of fire. You know. So, if I take a road.
And then, I put it in fire. Say, I take a metal road. Then, the road starts
becoming hot. It acquires the characteristics of fire. And as it becomes warmer.
And warmer. And warmer. Hotter. And hotter. And hotter. Then, not only does it
have externally the, you know, hea..., same heat which the fire has. But
actually, internally, also, it undergoes change. So, like that, when a devotee
comes close to Krishna, the symptom is manifest. But along with that symptoms,
the internal ecstasy also co..., appears. And the internal ecstasy stays. So,
then, when that internal ecstasy becomes steady, then that is called as
"samādhi". Now, you know, how is "sam...", the, now, let us look at how
"bhāva-bhakti" is achieved. You know. So, "bhāva-bhakti" is possible by two
ways. By practice. And by mercy. You know. So, by practice. And by mercy. Now,
what do practice means? Practice means sadhana-bhakti. So, we have discussed,
sadhana-bhakti is in two ways. There is "vaidhi" sadhana. And there is
"rāgānugā" sadhana. So, bhakti can be, the perfection can be achieved by
"vaidhi" sadhana. You know. For, as well as by "rāgānugā" sadhana. We can come
towards "bhāva". Now, he exa..., he gives examples for each of these. So, let
us look at the example. Prabhupada, first, for "vaidhi" sadhana, he gives the
example of "Nārada Muni". Of course, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives the example. And
Prabhupada elaborates on it. Now, you know, you know, "Nārada Muni"'s story is
fascinating. Because, you know, he was, you know, you know, he "Nārada Muni"'s
story illustrates so many of the principles of devotional service. And that is
why when "Vyāsadeva" has written all the Vedas. And after that, he is still
dissatisfied. And "Nārada Muni" wanted him to glorify pure devotional service.
So, this is described in 1.4. 5. And 6. "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". Fourth. Fifth. And
Sixth Chapters of the First Canto. So, there, "Nārada Muni" tells his own story.
How I came to Krishna Consciousness. "Nārada Muni" tells his, how I came. And
then, when he tells, he, it, he, through his story, demonstrates many of the
principles which the "Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam" will illustrate later on. Throughout
its thousands of verses. So, one of those principles is that he was from a very
low birth. He was born as a maidservant's child. And, you know, there is no
mention of the father of "Nārada Muni". You know. And yet, you know, we see the,
you know, you know, this maidservant, she is, still had, whatever be her
background, she still had an attitude of a devotional service. You know.
Service. Dispositions she had. And when these great Bhaktivedantas came, she
served the Bhaktivedantas. And seeing his mother, he also served them. And he
served them very digilently. He, so, that service were gratefruit. And they gave
instructions. He heard very carefully. Those instructions. And he even:

        ucastha lepan anu moditod vijay

He took their mahaprasad, also. And then, later on, when his mother passed away,
so, he decided that, let me follow what the Bhaktivedantas have told. Let me,
you know, go towards the north. And go, you know, give, become detached from
everything material. And absorb myself in Krishna. And when he did that, he saw,
for practice rigidly. So, now, when he practiced, started doing rigid practice,
Krishna appeared once. And then, Krishna disappeared. And when Krishna
disappeared, then what happened? You know. You know. Then, when Krishna
disappeared, you know, he was desperate. Oh. Please come. Please, I want to see.
Try to sit. And do meditation again. And try to replicate what he had done
earlier. Hoping that he will be able to see Krishna again. But when he, he could
not see Krishna, then he had, became very desperate. Almost devastated. And
then, he heard a voice. You know. You know. Practic..., keep, keep practicing
diligently throughout this life. And then, your future life, you will become,
you will have my constant association. You will be able to see Me. You will not
be able to see Me in this life. But your practice will purify. And then, what
happened? Now, you know, the, this was not "Nārada Muni". This was "Nārada" boy.
That means, in his previous life, who he was. So, this "Nārada", what did he do?
Determinedly practiced. Determinedly, you know, practiced bhakti. And by the
practice of bhakti, determinedly, he eventually attained perfection. Such a
perfection. That Srila Prabhupada says, he is supremely liberated. Even, he can
come in the material world. He can go out of the material world to the spiritual
world. Whenever he wants. And he can just fly. Not just fly. Even our airplanes,
or even the spacecrafts, that are there, if they have to fly, they need so much
planning. You know. They need fuel. They have to check the engine. And they have
to check the techni..., check the technical function of everything. And only
then, one can move. But "Nārada Muni" just desires. And right from "Pitra Loka",
he can just transfer himself to Svarga Loka. And he can come so quickly. You
know. Nobody can even detect him. Just right there immediately. So, he got,has
got such a freedom. So, he attained this. And "Nārada Muni" is completely
absorbed in love for Krishna. You know. So, how did he attain this? This was by,
you know, "vaidhi-bhakti". So, by diligent practice of sadhana-bhakti, he
attained, or of "vaidhi" sadhana-bhakti. He attained the stage of spontaneous
love for Krishna. Now, this spontaneous, this perfection of love, that is, you
know, ecstatic love as Prabhupada translates it. "bhāva-bhakti". Now, after
describing this example of "bhāva", then, you know, you know, Prabhupada writes,
now, how does one achieve "bhāva"? Prabhupada explains this:

"when a realized soul who is engaged in the service of the Lord is speaking, he
has the potency to inject spiritual life within the audience. One should,
therefore, seek the association of such pure, unalloyed devotees, and by such
association and service a neophyte devotee will certainly develop attachment,
love and devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead."

You know. So, what will happen? Here, he recommends primarily hearing. "Nārada
Muni" heard. So, now, we may say that "Nārada Muni" only heard for four months
in, "Cāturmāsa" was there. But what he heard, those words, he took them like
treasures into his heart. And he cherished them over there. And he remembered
them. Those words echoed in his heart. And he molded his own life according to
what he had heard. You know. So, now, so, he had to know about practice to
achieve realisation. But the seed for that practice was in the words that he
had heard. Those words became the map for his life. So, hearing is very
important. And when we hear from Srila Prabhupada, we hear from the great
devotees, then that inspires us. And that, you know, that inspire, inspiration
may be conscious in terms of, yes, I feel like I should do it. Or it is also
subconscious in the sense that just by hearing those devotees, their desires are
getting transferred to us. And when those desires are transferred to us, they
become our desires. Our desires become purified that way. And that is how by
"vaidhi-bhakti", one can get to "bhāva-bhakti". Then, by "rāgānugā-bhakti",
Prabhupada gives the example of a lady in, from, name "Chandrakanti". This is
from the "Padma Purāṇa". So, this "Chandrakanti", you know, you know, what
happened? She, the "Padma Purāṇa" describes this ana..., this incident. That,
you know, she came once to a temp..., she, she was herself a devotee. But then,
she, that day, once she came to a temple. And she saw a beautiful deity of
Krishna. And when she saw the deity of Krishna, she was so a warmed by ecstasy.
She just started dancing. Dancing with the view, own mother. The divine sort of
madness. And she, normally, when we dance in kirtan, we may, may dance for five
minutes. Ten minutes. Fifteen  minutes. After that, we get tired. Physically,
the body can only do so much, you know, dancing. But then, when this
"Chandrakanti", which, she was not dancing at a physical level. She was infused
with spiritual energy. And without stopping, she danced for the entire night.
Entire night. And what happened? Actually, because, here, the, it was not a
"vaidhi". It was not that sometimes when kirtans are going on, we are all told,
you should dance. And then, because it is a discipline. We are told to dance, we
dance. That would be "vaidhi" dancing. But here, she was dancing. There was
nobody telling her to dance. She was just, you know, attract..., she was just so
charmed by the beauty of Krishna, as the, in the deity form. That she was just,
got captivated. And, and she started dancing. Dancing. Dancing. And she got
actually the mood of Kri..., you know, of the gopis of Vrindavan. So, just as
the gopis were dancing with Krishna, and the gopis were dancing for Krishna. In
the rasa-lila has, rasa dance has many aspects to it. Sometimes, Krishna, so,
so, she was dancing for Krishna's pleasure. And she kept dancing throughout the
night. And that dancing throughout the night, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" explains is
indicating of her development of "rāgānugā-bhakti". She was dancing. You know.
Sorry, not "rāgānugā-bhakti". "bhāva-bhakti". She has come to the level of
ecstatic love. And by, and energised by that ecstatic love, she is dancing
constantly. Fervently. With unceasingly, throughout the whole night. And then,
you know, in the next chapter, we will see, also, how this "bhāva-bhakti" is
characteristic of, this is, the, this, the, her example of "bhāva-bhakti",
char..., it, this, exhibits one characteristic. It is called as
"avyartha-kālatvaṁ". So, "kāla" is time. "vyartha" is to waste. "avyartha" is
to not waste. So, "avyartha-kālatvaṁ" means to not waste any time at all. So,
she was so ecstatic. That she did not want to waste one moment in anything else.
She just wanted to dance. Dance. And dance more. That is "avyartha-kālatvaṁ".
And then, you know, and "bhāva" can also be achieved by mercy. So, now, we
discussed "bhāva" by practice. In practice, there was "vaidhi". And
"rāgānugā-bhakti". Now, we come to mercy. Now, Srila Prabhupada explains:

"simply by speaking, simply by glancing and simply by good wishes."

So, you know, this refers to "vacika". "darsana-dana". And "harda". This is what
is mentioned over here. By words. By glances. And by good wishes. So, by words.
By glances. And by good wishes. What does that mean? That sometimes, the Lord
may speak. You know. I bless you. And that, those, that, those words of
blessing comprise, or they include the potency by which, the devotee becomes
infused with "bhāva-bhakti". And as a reference, you know, quot..., discussion
between Krishna and "Nārada Muni" is quoted, Where Krishna tells "Nārada Muni"
that I bless you with unalloyed devotion. So, now, we may say that, actually,
you know, just now, it was said that, Narada Muni has attained perfection to
"vaidhi-bha...", through "vaidhi-bhakti". So, through, then how is it the same,
how is same thing even for "kṛpā" over here? You know. That "rāgānugā", the
"bhāva-bhakti" being attained by "kṛpā". Through "vacika". You know. No. It is
not exactly talking about "Nārada Muni". It is talking about the principle. This
quote from Krishna. Krish..., this quote is given. Where Krishna is making this
statement that I bless you with devotion. So, it is Krishna speaking those
words. They are tantamount. They are performative utterances. Performative
utterances means when they are spoken, the action will happen. Just like when
our judge says, let this prisoner be hanged. It is a performative utterance.
That means that utterance will lead to the performance of some action. Now, if
an ordinary citizen says, let this person be hanged. Nothing will happen. So,
that person does not have the power. So, when a per..., so, that means, what,
the words that are spoken by Krishna, because He is omnipotent. You know. They
have powers. When Krishna is "vacika". Krishna says, may your help your
devotion. Then, that person will get pure devotion by that. That means "vacika".
And then, there is "darsana-dana". "darsana-dana" means, you know, so, there is
another reference given. Of how, you know, the, you know, devotees of
"Jāṅgam...", Desha, you know, of, "Jāṅgala Desha". So, what happened? The
inhabitants, you know, what happened to them was, that "Jāṅgala", rather, you
know, they, what happened to them was that they, you know, got the darshan of
the Lord. And here, Prabhupada quotes over here. You know. You know. So, here,
Prabhupada is quoting one by one. The inh...:

“When the inhabitants of Jāṅgala Province saw the Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa,
they were so stricken with feeling that they could not withdraw their glance
from Him.”

You know. You know. They could not withdraw their glance. So, here, what is the,
what is he talking about? What is a stricken? Stricken with feeling. Now,
normally, with the word stricken is used in negative sense, is stricken with, we
say grief-stricken. But then, this is, the stricken, basically, does not have to
be used in a negative sense. Here, it is used in a positive sense. Here, the
stricken means, where there is extreme intensity in the feeling. The word
stricken is used. So, the devotees, you know, you know, they are so stricken
with feeling. In the sense that they are completely captivated by attraction to
Krishna. So, when the devotees of the jungle province, when they saw Krishan,
so, they did not have "bhāva-bhakti". At, before they saw Him. But when they got
the darshan of the Supreme Lord, then just by beholding, just, the
all-attractive beauty of the Supreme Lord, they became attracted. And they
developed "bhāva" over there. That is the example given. And then, there can be,
you know, "harda". "harda" means by heartfelt blessing. You know. That heartfelt
blessing can come from the Lord. Or that can even come from the devotee. So,
here, the example is given of "Śukadeva Gosvāmī". You know. You know. So,
"Śuka":

"in the Śuka-saṁhitā"

It is being quoted:

"where Nārada tells Śrīla Vyāsadeva,"

“You have a son who is the greatest devotee of the Personality of Godhead, and I
can observe that without any following of the regulative principles of
devotional service, he is already enriched with many of the symptoms achieved by
the execution of devotional service after many, many births.”

So, what does this mean? This means, you know, now, we know that, you know,
"Śukadeva Gosvāmī" was in the womb for a long time. And he, because he was so
concerned that if I am coming to the world, there is maya. And that maya will
interact me. So, better I stay inside the womb, only. I will not come out only.
Then, actually, "Vyāsadeva" told no. You will not come out. You will get
trapped. You will not get trapped. He said no. He was, still was not ready to
come. Then, "Vyāsadeva" beseeched the Lord. And the Lord came. And gave an
assurance. That you will not get entangled. Now, you can come out. So, at that
time, that, that is described. So, the Lord also told "Vyā...", "Vyāsadeva"
that, actually, your son is ex..., exhbiting very great love of God. And that
love of God, which is being exhibited, you know, that as how do they get it? So,
it is equiva..., it is equialent of the love of God that is developed after many
lifetimes of practice. So, how has that love of God come about? It has come
about by the practice of, it has come about by "kṛpā". So, hard. This is, Lord
blessed "Śukadeva Gosvāmī". You know, And that is how "Śukadeva Gosvāmī" got
that ecstatic love of God. Now, after this, you know, then there are further
examples. Of love of God coming about in mysterious ways. You know. You know.
So, now, there have to, he says, the harder can be from the Lord. And the harder
can be from the devotee. So, now, here, here, there is this, you know, you know,
"Nārada" is addressing "Yudhiṣṭhira".

"it is very difficult to describe the character of Prahlāda."

And then, you know, so what he is tell..., this example is, this example might
not seem very clear. But, you know:

"This is called"

Prabhupada writes over there:

"This is called natural attraction. It is caused by the special grace of the
Personality of Godhead or by the special grace of a great devotee like Nārada."

So, what this means is, you know, that, you know, you know, here, what is
happening is, "Nārada Muni" has got such great devotion. Now, how did "Prahlāda"
get that devotion? "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is explaining here that when "Nārada" was in
the womb. When "Nārada" was instructing. You know. You know. You know.
"Prahlāda"s mother. "Ka...", "Hiranyakashipu"'s wife. Along with that,
"Prahlāda" was in the womb. And "Nārada Muni" was the well-wisher of both. And
"Nārada Muni" did, wished that, you know, this child. Let him be a great
devotee. And then, what happened was, by that, the great devotion of "Prahlāda"
manifested. And similar, another example that is given here is of "Mṛgāri". So,
"Mṛgāri" was also, you know, he was such a terrible demon. But, you know, but
when "Vyā...", "Nārada Muni" saw, why is he killing, how, and why is not killing
animals like that? Not only killing, half-killing animals like this. Such a
terrible thing to do. And "Nārada Muni" desired, let, let this be reformed. Let
this person be reformed. And then, what happened was, we know, "Mṛgāri" became
such a transformed person that he was not even ready to hurt ants. That is the
tremendous character change that can come about in a person by the blessing of
great devotees. So, "harda". You know. That is by heartfelt blessings. So, now,
in this chapter, what all have we discussed? We discussed the definition of
"bhāva-bhakti". Then, we have discussed the, you know, you know, primary and
secondary characteristic of "bhāva-bhakti". Then, we have discussed the, you
know, ways in which "bhāva-bhakti" can be attained. So, the primary
characteristic of "bhāva-bhakti" was that it is, "śuddha-sattva" decends. And
the second characteristic is "citta-masṛṇya-". That there is the, you know,
experience of various emotions. "rasas". "citta-masṛṇya-". Softening of the
heart that happens. And then, how does "bhāva-bhakti" come about? It can come
about by, you know, by sadhana-bhakti. Or it can come out by "kṛpā". In
sadhana-bhakti, how, what sort of sadhana-bhakti can it bring it, bring it
about? It can come about by "vaidhi" sadhana-bhakti. Or by "rāgānugā"
sadhana-bhakti. And when it comes to "kṛpā", it can be "vacika". The Lord may
speak it. And then, by that, it may happen in "darsana-dana". The Lord may give
darshan. And that may captivate the heart of a devotee. Or it may be "harda".
There may be heartfelt blessing that may be given. Even when there is no
utterance of that is blessing, blessing directly. So, this "harda" is different
from "vacika". Because in these cases, you know, you know, "Nārada" and
"Prahlāda". Or "Nāra...", you know, "Nārada" and "Mṛgāri". Or even before that.
The Lord and "Śukadeva", there was no direct speeking of the Lord with that
devotee. For the Lord just communicates, you know, you know, actually, the, most
of the time, parc..., "Prahlāda" is in the womb. And even "Śukadeva" is in the
womb. "Śukad...", "Śukadeva" is not yet Goswami at that time. He is just baby
"Śukadeva" at that time. So, he is in the womb. So, there is no direct. No
talking between the two, also. But the, just the desire that also, it is enough
for the ecstatic love of Godhead to mani..., love of God to manifest. So, now,
after discussing this, let us go to the next chapter. So, what happens in the
next chapter?

This is characteristic, "Character of One In Ecstatic Love". You know. You know.
You know. Now, this is a very important chapter. Because this will differentiate
between, so, there are nine characteristics that are described over here. And we
will look at the sanskrit words, also, as "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has used it. And these
characteristics, what is the importance of these characteristics to understand?
That actually, you know, when we say "citta-masṛṇya-". "citta-masṛṇya-" means
softness of the heart. You know. You know. So, softness of the heart can lead to
tears. You know. And, you know, one may say, oh, this person is having so much
tears. This person must be very advanced. Must be having a lot of love of God.
So, what happens is, how do we know this? How can we know whether a person has
a deep love of God? Or not? So, is it just by the presence of tears? There are
two dangers with this, you know, equalisation of outer tears with inner exalted
love of God. Inner, you know, with the equalisation of outer tears with inner,
you know, you know, presence of ecstat..., exalted, ecstatic love of God.
Because it is possible that there may be imitators, who may somehow get some
tears. And they are getting those tears, not because they have love for God. But
because they want the prestige. In the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", there are
incidents. You know. When "Haridāsa Thakur" would be in ecstasy, there was a
snake charmer. That person would be playing. And then, "Haridāsa Thakur" would
be dancing in ecstasy. But then, another person given, started meditating. And
that snake charmer just simply bet him off. Because that is meditating. That
person just were, ran away from there afterwards. Because he realised that the
imitation is not going to work. So, now, in that case, the person was discerning
enough to know that this perso..., this, this fellow is imitating. But it may
not be so easy to recognise who is imitating. Love of God. So, therefore, there
is, you know, there may be external symptoms without the inner devotion. On the
other hand, there may also be inner devotion. But that, some devoteese may not
manifest that external symptoms. That is because, actually, the, you know,
symptoms, that the sympt..., the expressions of love of God, lo..., that is
private. You know. Now, devotee does not parade one's devotion to the Lord. And
that is why the tears, a devotee may try, cry in private. The tears of ecstasy.
And therefore, one may not see in public the symptoms of ecstatic love. Then, if
this happens, then how do we actually know that a devotee has, really has, is in
advanced stage. So that, there can be the presence of externals without the
internals. And there may be the internal without the external. Without the
external means, specifically, the tears. And that sort of, you know, that sort
of exhibition of devotional emotions. Expression or exhibition of devotional
emotions. So, how can we know? That is why here, in this chapter, there are
these, you know, ex..., symptoms which are, you know, which are sustained. Which
are exhibited over a period of time. And they are not very easily imitable. And
these symptoms are a much more reliable guide of spiritual advancement. So, for
ourselves. And for others. You know. If somebody cries in ecstasy, we may think,
oh, this person is very advanced. Now, that person may or may not be. We will
discuss about whether a person is truly advanced. Or not. A little bit later.
There are different kinds of, you know, you know, you know, you know, shadow
emotions. That can come about. There is "abhasa". And "chaya". We will discuss
that a little later. But here, let us suffice it to say that let us look, focus
on the characteristics of one who has immense love for God. So, first point,
Prabhupada makes is, you know, "avyartha-kālatvaṁ".

"He is always anxious to utilize his time in the devotional service of the
Lord. He does not like to be idle. He wants service always, twenty-four hours a
day, without deviation."

Utilisation of time. "avyartha-kālatvaṁ". So, we see this, in the life of the
goswamis. Where they would barely sleep. For just a few hours. So that they
could constantly be engaged in glorifying Krishna. In every possible way. Just
keep glorifying. Keep glorifying Krishna. That was their divine madness.
"avyartha-kālatvaṁ". They could not live without glorifying Krishna. And same
was with Srila Prabhupada. He would barely sleep for a few hours. And even at
night. A whole day, he would be speaking about Krishna. Glorifying Krishna.
Making arrangements further for Krishna's glorifications. At night, also, for a
few hours, it, sleep. And he would wake up. And again, starts speaking about
Krishna. Through his, through the dictating. So that his books would be written.
That is "avyartha-kālatvaṁ". Then, there is, you know, you know, "kṣāntir".
"kṣāntir" is that, you know, you know:

"When a person is undisturbed even in the presence of various causes of
disturbance, he is called reserved and perseverant."

And:

        gaṅgā ca devī dhṛta-cittam īśe

        taṁ mopayātaṁ ...

So, this is very beautiful verse in 1.19.15. You know. So, here, "Parīkṣit
Mahārāja" is, you know, detach..., is exhibiting that, you know, "perseverance".
So, what is that "perseverance"? Actually, he is saying that, ok, I have been
cursed. And let the, let the snake bird. Or whatever, that is being created by
the Brahman son, let it come and bite me.

        .. gāyata viṣṇu-gāthāḥ

But you please speaking about the glories of Lord Vishnu. And I will keep
hearing the glories. And in that way, by speaking and hearing of the glories, I
will be able to, by being absorbed in the glories of the Lord, I will be, I will
become transcendental. So, here, what is being exhibited is that, normally, when
we want something, we want it. But when there are some difficulties, we say, ok,
ok, forget it. Even if I do not get it, I, I cannot take so much trouble for it.
So, what happens is, there is our desire. And when some trouble comes, then we
say, ok, forget it. I will not do it. But when the desire is very strong. No
matter how big the trouble comes, somehow, we find a way ahead. So, here, when
there is ecstatic love of God, that desire for Krishna is so strong. So intense
that, you know, you know, one does not perceive any obs..., the, even no matter
what obstacles come. One keep persevering. Persevering. Somehow or the other,
moving towards Krishna. We discussed earlier about how nothing holds a devotee
back. A devotee holds nothing back. Nothing, the, so, we discussed this in
connection with how a pure devotion, devotee's longing for Krishna is like a
river going towards the ocean.

        gaṅgevaugham udanvati

As "Kuntī Maharani" also says in 1.8.42 in her prayers. In the First Canto. That
just as the Ganga flows towards the ocean, let my consciousness flow towards
You. Just perseverence. And we see this again in the life of Srila Prabhupada.
So many obstacles. You know. His family was not very cooperative. Then, his
business did not work. He start..., had a magazing. People were not interested.
He started an institution. And it, he was, by political conspiracy, he was
driven out of the place where he was starting his institution. He tried to help
is godbrothers. And his godbrothers had a narrow-minded vision. And he tried to,
you know, you know, write books. And he ran out of funds. Even he, when he, when
he wrote books, still, people were not serious in taking up what he was giving.
He went to Amer..., set to go to America. He got a heart attack on the way.
Somehow, he got to America. And somebody broke in. And stole his typewriter.
Then, you know, finally, he was staying at a particular place. Then, he was not
allowed to speak over there. Then, he got his own place to stay. But then, his
room partner so suddenly attacked him. And was about to came to him with almost
with a violent intention. So that Prabhupada had to flee from that place. So
many obstacles. But Prabhupada was determined. Whatever happens, keep moving
forward. Then, there is "viraktir". So, "viraktir" i..., is, example for this is
detachment. "viraktir" or detachment. So, here, the example for this is "Bharata
Mahārāja". So, what happens with "Bharata Mahārāja" is that he was completely
detached from material things. And when he had that attraction:

        uttamaḥśloka-lālasaḥ

So, because he has a desire to attain the "uttama shloka", the Supreme Lord, you
know, so, what happened? He just, it is said that everything worldly, you know,
he had opulence. He had family. Beautiful wife. He had children. Everything he
had. But he just left it. "mala-vad". As if it were just Like stool. So, the,
their example is very graphic. Because generally, when we respond to nature, we
do not even look back. We just flush. And go away from there. So, like that,
without even looking back, he just left. And, and that is an example of
"viraktir". And then, there is "māna-śūnyatā". Pridelessness. You know. You
know. So, you know, pridelessness. "māna-śūnyatā". You know. So, you know, so,
here, "Padma Purāṇa" gives the example of "Bhagīratha". Who was a great king.
But:

"he became a mendicant"

And then:

"He was so humble that he respectfully bowed down before"

Even the, his political enemies. And untouchables. So, that was the
"māna-śūnyatā" that he developed. And then, Prabhupada gives the example,
recently, of a: 

"big landlord known as Lal Babu, a Calcutta landholder, became a Vaiṣṇava and
lived in Vṛndāvana."

And then, this is how, the point is, it is not that one, everybody has to become
a beggar. That is not the point. The point here is that when one has developed
love for Krishna, one does not care for anything else. One takes cares only for
serving Krishna. Pleasing Krishna. And for nothing else. So, you know, for the
sake of pleasing Krishna, even if one has to be dishonored, one does not mind
it. Because that is the way one is expressing one's love for Krishna. So, we
see Nityananda Prabhu, He is, Himself was the Supreme Lord. But he was going
around begging. Please chant the holy names. And then, "Haridāsa Thakur" was
also doing the same thing when he was going with Nityananda Prabhu. So, that
"māna-śūnyatā". So, a devotee is not at all concerned about "māna". A devotee
is concerned simply about Krishna. And pleasing Krishna. You know. So, this is
not very easy. You know. Imitators may very easily get tears. But to actually
put aside one's own act..., you know, one pride, and, you know, ego, and do,
humble oneself. It is not easy. And to do it day in and day out, year after
year, that, you know, requires genuine love of God. Otherwise, one will not be
able to continue it. Then, "āśā-bandhaḥ". "āśā-bandhaḥ" means, one has
tremendous hope. That no matter what happens, Krishna will be merciful. I will
just keep practicing devotional service, no matter what happens. No matter how
many reversals. No matter how many limitations I have. Reversals may come in
externally in my life. Internally, also, I may have limitations. I may have
anarthas. But still, one day, Krishna will bestow mercy on me. And then, I will
attain perfection. In fact, the "ācārya"s describe that, the devotee should
have such, you know, such faith in Krishna. Such hope. Hope against hope. Such
hope, we should have that even if Krishna Himself comes and says, you know,
there is no chance for your spiritual advancement. Still, a devotee will get
devote practicing. Why? Because a devotee will understand, this is a, this is a
test of Krishna. And Krishna is supremely merciful. Nobody is hopeless. So, a
devotee has to have hope. And actually, if we do not have hope, then what does
it indicate? It indicates that, or the result of that firstly will be that, we
will lose the battle even before the battle begins. Because what will keep us
fighting on against the temptations, against the distractions, against the
tribulations, is our hope. That yes, one day, we will develop love for Krishna.
We will awaken love for Krishna. So, if we do not have that hope, then even
before the battle starts, with they, what is the use of fighting? Anyway, I am
not going to succeed only. Let me just fall into sense gratification. That will
be very unfortunate. So, a devotee should have hope. And how do we get that
hope? By looking at how the great devotees may have gone through very
tribulations. But eventually, Krishna redeemed them. Eventually, Krishna
reverted them. You know. You know. You know. So, you know, here, he gives the
example from "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is himself. That:

"He says, “I have no love for Kṛṣṇa, nor for the causes of developing love of
Kṛṣṇa – namely, hearing and chanting. And the process of bhakti-yoga, ..."

"..., is also lacking in me."

And then, I do not have any jnana and punya, also. And then:

"I am not even born of a nice family."

So, there, what is left for me?

"I simply wish and hope that some way or other I may be able to approach Your
lotus feet, and this hope is giving me pain, because I think myself quite
incompetent to approach that transcendental goal of life.”"

So, this is "āśā-bandhaḥ". So, one knows that, one, one does not have many
qualifications. But still, one keeps having hope. That is hope. You know. Now,
this is, now, "EAGERNESS FOR ACHIEVING THE DESIRED SUCCESS". "samutkaṇṭhā".
"samutkaṇṭhā". You know. "utkaṇṭhā" is eagerness. "samutkaṇṭhā" is intense
eagerness. And the example is "Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura".

"“I am eagerly waiting to see that boy of Vṛndāvana whose bodily beauty is
captivating the whole universe,"

And then, there is the description of the worldly beauty. And then:

"through those lips there comes a sound vibration which drives one madder than a
mad elephant. I want so much to see Him at Vṛndāvana!”"

So, you know, this is now "samutkaṇṭhā". So, earlier, also, we discussed
something similar. There was "laulyam". "laulyam" is intense greed. The:

        ... laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

So, similarly, "samutkaṇṭhā". So, now, these are very, these are not imitable
characteristics. One may act as if one is eager for one day. Two days. But
unless one has a deep eagerness to attain Krishna. One will not be able to
continue it day after day. Month after month. Year after year. So, these are all
non-imitable, reliable symptoms. And like that, then there is:

        nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ

You know. That is constant desire to chant the holy glories of Krishna. You
know. You know. So, here, one of the associates of Radharani, that is from
"Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta".

“O Lord Govinda, the girl who is the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu is now shedding
tears, and She is anxiously chanting Your holy name – ‘Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!’”

This is exhibiting the, you know, you know, chant, the "nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ" of
Srimati iRadharani. And then, there is, you know, you know, "EAGERNESS TO
DESCRIBE THE LORD’S TRANSCENDENTAL QUALITIES". This refers to, you know, you
know, the, you know, that, so, this is referring to, first, the names. And this
is referring to, generally, the qualities. The pastimes. The eagerness to
glorify the Lord. And then, there is this, also a reference from "Kṛṣṇa". So,
"Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta". What is it actually? "Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta" is a very ecstatic
book. Which is written by "Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura". And in that, he describes the
pastimes of "Kṛṣṇa". And especially the interact..., the fee..., emotions and
feelings of the great devotees of "Kṛṣṇa" as they long for Him. And as they
unite with Him. And as they serve Him. And so, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is giving this,
also, as a reference. For us to understand what is the nature of ecstatici love
for Krishna. And then, "prītis tad-vasati-sthale". "prītis tad-vasati-sthale" is
"ATTRACTION FOR LIVING IN A PLACE WHERE KṚṢṆA HAS HIS PASTIMES". You know. So,
now, this was earlier mentioned, also, as a, you know, now, Prabhupada gives
analysis for this, you know, elaborate analysis that, you know, now, earlier, it
was said that, you know:

"At this place Dāmodara, who can cut the knot of our material existence, was
tied up by His mother, Yaśodā.”

So, this is describing how Krishna was so special. Krishna was tied over here.
One is remembering, oh, this is such a wonderful place. I want to go there. I
want to be there. So, now, earlier, it was said that one should stay in the
dhama. That is important. No doubt. But that is as a, that is a part of
"vaidhi-bhakti". As a rule, one should do that. Staying in the dhama. But here,
it is different here. Just as a spontaneous eagerness. Intense longing. You
know. And almost intolerable craving. I just want to be there. In the holy
place. "prītis tad-vasati-sthale". And then, like this, the characteristics are
described of one who is in love of God. You know. One was has ecstative love of
God. Now, after this, there is another thing which is being discussed, let us
look at this a little bit more carefully. Uh-huh. So, "nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ", we
discussed all this characteristics. Now, there is two kinds of rasa..., you
know, "rathyabhasa". So, "rati" means, "rathyabasa" is a reflection of "bhāva".
You know. You know. You know. And there are, what are these? "pratibimba". And
"chaya". "pratibimba". And "chaya". What he says? So, Prabhupada points to
this when he says:

"This attachment is very confidentially kept by Kṛṣṇa and is bestowed only upon
pure devotees. Even ordinary devotees cannot have such pure attachment for
Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, how is it possible for success to be achieved by persons whose
hearts are contaminated by the actions and reactions of fruitive activities and
who are entangled by various types of mental speculation?"

So, let us try to understand this. "pratibimba namabhasa" . And, or "pratibimba
rathyabhasa". And "chaya". So, "pratibimba" refers to reflection. And "chaya"
refers to shadow. Now, both these, you know, terms or concepts have the
indication of some connection with reality. But not the presence of reality.
When I see a "pratibimba", when I see a reflection, that means the object is
there somewhere. But it is not in the reflection. And when I see a "chaya", the
shadow, that means, also, the object is somewhere there. but the shadow is not
the object. So, what is, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" referring to here in
"pratibimba". And "chaya". He is basically saying that, in the first case,
sometimes, some people who are primarily motivated for success in karma. And
jnana. They may practice bhakti bhakti to attain success in their respective
paths. That means to attain success in karma. Or to attain success in jnana,
they may think bhakti is a tool. If I do bhakti, very intensely, then by that, I
will gain success. So, they are using bhakti as a tool. And because they want
the success in that particular path, they may practice bhakti intensely, also.
And by that, while there, so, such people, with these motivations, when they
come and come in the association of devotees, they may chant. And dance. And
they may also seem to experience ecstasy. So, now, because their motive is not
pure, so, the ecstasy that they experience is also not pure. It is contaminated.
And that contamination is called as "pratibimba namabhasa". So, or "pratibimba
rathyabhasa" over here. It can, "namabhasa" is specifically of the chanting the
holy names. If they get that, that is "namabhasa". But otheriwse, it is
"rathyabhasa". The emo..., "rati" is the emotion. Whatever the emotion that
experience, it is "abhasa". It is a reflection. It is not the real thing. So,
when one has an impure motive, and then one chants, then the emotions that one
experiences are also incomplete. They are not the full emotions. And these
emotions are, you know, are sometimes by those who are undiscerning, they may
mistake them, oh, these are actually, these are really advanced emotions. But
they are not. So, the example is, you know, we can get good example of in
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta". When "Raghunatha Bhatta Goswami" was coming to meet
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, at that time, there was one, you know, "Ramadas Viśvāsa"
who came with him. He seemed to be a great "Rāma" bhakta. Constantly chanting
the name of "Rāma". And doing all sorts of bhakti-yoga. He wanted to carry the
laggage of "Rāma", "Raghunatha Bhatta Goswami". And he was constantly chanting
the names of "Rāma". And he did not want to do anything except bhakti to "Rāma".
But when he met Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu did not give much
regard to him. And why was that? When Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was asked, he said,
he is chanting the name of "Rāma". But und..., his goal is to become "Rāma". And
this sort of, you know, devotion is not very pleasing to the Lord. So, this is
"pratibimba namabhasa". When one is chanting the, one who is doing bhakti, one
is chanting the name. But one is not desiring to please Krishna. One wants to
have impersonal oneness. So, this "pratibimba". And then, the "chaya" is when,
you know, you know, one, you know, one is not yet purified. One may have not yet
practiced bhakti seriously. But one just cul..., out of social convention. Out
of curiosity, one comes in the association of devotees, and starts chanting.
Starts dancing. Starts singing. And sometimes, starts experiencing ecstasy,
sometimes, we see that, you know, we, sometimes, perform harinaam sankirtan. And
devotees have been in the movement for, for several years. They do not feel much
ecstasy. But some new person comes, and their f..., if their eyes become so big.
And their face becomes so bright. And they seem to be experiencing more ecstasy
than what the devotees are experiencing. Those who have been practicing for many
years. How is that?

Actually, that is not really pure ecstasy. That is "chaya". So, they are just
getting a glimpse of that. It is a shadow. It is shadow which they are
experiencing. Why? Because in the association of devotees, the potency is there.
And litte potency rubs off on them. And that is how they experience. Now, both
are, you know, not the real thing. Neither the "abhasa". "pratibimba namabhasa".
Or the "chaya". They are not the real thing. But one can, they, you know, they
can act as precursor to the real thing. If both of them can purify their hearts.
So, now, among these two, relatively speaking, the "chaya" is better. Because
one has not yet conta..., one not yet contaminated by wrong motive. One is not
using bhakti for some other purpose. Just come out of curiosity. Or social
convention. Social convention means, ok, it is circumventional to dance. So, let
me, also, dance. Some comes along. And dance. But then, if one comes, how can
one rise from this shadow or reflection to the real substance? That is by the
association of devotees. If one associates with devotees, the devotees will
inject pure desires in our heart. And by the expe..., by those pure desires,
pure, you know, love will awaken. And one can come to the stage of ecstatic
love of God. This is how one can attain perfection. And, you know, so, Srila
Prabhupada, you know:

"Srila Prabhupada describes shadow attachment (chaya) as parā, transcendental.
Even though it is less intense, shadow attachment (chaya) is better than
reflective attachment (prati-bimba) because there is less ulterior motive."

And Prabhupada concludes by saying that:

"if such attachment is seen manifested even in some common man, by the
association of a pure devotee it can bring one to the perfectional stage. But
such attachment for Kṛṣṇa cannot be invoked in a person without his being
sufficiently blessed by the association of pure devotees."

That means, the more they association with the pure devotees, then what will
happen? One will attain supreme perfection by that. So, we will continue with
this discussion in our next class. Where we will also discuss about prema. And
then, we will conclude our discussion, "The Nectar of Devotion".

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
