Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4qo8p22MqBQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?v=4qo8p22MqBQ&redir_token=oIdQQWCl5IPnO3vPXWjWX1wJYL18MTU0ODQ5MDU5MkAxNTQ4NDA0MTky&event=video_description&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_160_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_16_-_Raganuga_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhakti, Bhakti Shastri course. We are
discussing the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And we now are discussing
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, the wave which talked about, you know, the ocean is
divided into parts. So, in the Eastern ocean, there is a wave which talks about
"vaidhi-bhakti". In fact, so, in the "vaidhi-bhakti", that "vaidhi-bhakti" got,
got over in the 14th Chapter. And 15th and 16th Chapters talk about, you know,
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, now, "vaidhi" and "rāgānugā", both are parts of
"sadhana-bhakti". So, let us look at "rāgānugā-bhakti" further. Now, in the
quick recap of the previous chapter to, you know, you know, you know, continue
our discussion from there. You know. "rāgānugā". And "rāgātmikām". So,
"rāgātmikām" is the bhakti, it is the p..., we could put it, "rāgātmikām" and
"rāgānugā" as, "rāgātmikām" is the perfection of spontaneous devotion. And
"rāgānugā" is the practice of spontaneous devotion. So, "rāgātmikām" means, say,
the devotee, like Yashoda Mayi, she, for her, "rāgā", his, her, is the "ātmā".
He is filled with spontaneous attraction for Krishna. So, the word "rāgā", here,
is, refers to spontaneous attraction. And a devotee who wants to serve in the
mood of Yashoda Mayi, that devotee will be, said to be "rāgānugā". Means that
devotee is doing practice to develop spontaneous devotion. So, there is the, you
know, "rāgātmikām". That is the perfection of spontaneous devotion. "rāgānugā"
is the practice of spontaneous devotion. "ānugā". "ānugā" means to follow. Now,
in the footsteps of. You know. And there, we were discussing, while we were
discussing about, you know, "rāgānugā-bhakti", we discussed, you know, about
"rāgātmikām" bhakti. And based on the "Bhāgavatam" shloka where, how
different devotees attained perfection by absorption in Krishna. So, there, we:

        gopyaḥ kāmād bhayāt kaṁso
        dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ

So, like, like that, that verse, when we discussed, you know, you know:

        sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehād
        yūyaṁ bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho

So, there, when we discussed these different categories. So, different devotees.
So, we discussed how the devotees, who are in, you know, various categories. If
the mood is unfavorable, that is, say, "bhayāt". Or "dveṣāc". Then, that is not
the nature in which anybody will be serving in the spiritual world. So, that is
not "rāgātmikām" bhakti. And similarly, the "Pāṇḍavas". And the devotees, like
"Nārada", they are not always serving in the mood of spontaneous devotion. They
may be in awareness of the, unaware..., awareness of the greatness of the Lord.
And there may be awe and reverence. Which leads to serving in the mood and duty.
And therefore, the "rāgātmikām" bhaktas are primarily "sambandha-rūpā". Which
are the "Dwarka vasis". They are related with the Lord. Now, and, and there are
"kāmā-rūpā". They are the "Vraja vasis". Especially, the gopis. They are not
directly related with the Lord. But they serve the Lord spontaneously, really.
Out of their attraction. And then, we discussed how that attraction is not
material attraction. It is spiritual. It is, you know, you know, you know, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" gives, you know, repeats the example which is also given by "Krishna
Dasa Kaviraja Goswami". Both of them talk about similar concepts. That one is
selfish. Lust is selfish. Love is selfless. So, the example, which is given, is
lust is like copper. And love is like gold. So, lust and love, you know, seem,
can seem similar. They can seem similar. Because if, you know, copper is
gold-coated. Then, it can appear to be shining like gold. But then, once a, if
the copper plate, which is gold-coated, appears to be like gold. But then, if it
is exposed to some hot temperature. Or it is exposed to some rough surface.
Then, the gold-coating comes off. And then inner copper gets revealed. So, like
that, sometimes, love may seem to be selfless. Or lust may seem to be selfless.
But once some difficulties come up, the heat comes up. Heat of challenges.
Difficulties. Troubles comes up. Then, the selfish core gets reveleaed. Gets
exposed. Rather. And then, that seem to be not love. But lust. So, there is a
difference between love and lust. You know. You know. Now, after discussing
this, then we also discussed how, you know, we have to be careful abut this
"kāmā-rūpā". Not mistake it to be material. Not mistake it to be, you know, this
worldly pleasure. And then, after that, now, in this chapter, let us look at
chapter, you know, you know, 16 over here. "Spontaneous Devotion Further
Described". So, what? In this "Spontaneous Devotion Further Described", so,
Prabhupada writes:

"In the attitude of the denizens of Vṛndāvana, such as Nanda Mahārāja and mother
Yaśodā, is to be found the ideal transcendental concept of being the father and
mother of Kṛṣṇa, the original Personality of Godhead."

So, "the ideal transcendental concept of being the father and mother". So, that
is true, ideal conception. And that they have the spontaneous love. You know.
Now, what is the "ELIGIBILITY FOR SPONTANEOUS DEVOTIONAL SERVICE"? So, to
understand this, you know, Prabhupada writes first of all that we have to go
beyond "anartha-nivṛtti". Which means the disappearance of all material
contamination. So, let us try to understand this. Now, we know the nine stages
of the progression of bhakti. So, "śraddhā". "sādhu-saṅgaḥ". "bhajana-kriyā".
"anartha-nivṛttiḥ". Then, "niṣṭhā". Then, there is "ruciḥ". "āsaktiḥ". "bhāvaḥ".
And "prema". So, what is the qualification for practicing "rāgānugā-bhakti"? One
has to go beyond "anartha-nivṛtti". One has to come to the level of "niṣṭhā".
So, so, one starts with "śraddhā". "sādhu-saṅgaḥ". "bhajana-kriyā". So, this
"bhajana-kriyā", which we will talk about, and in the "sādhu-saṅgaḥ" that is
talked about, that is "vaidhi-bhakti". So, the impetus is by "vidhi", is by
rules. Yes. This is what one must do. Because these are the rules. One starts
with "vaidhi-bhakti". And then, after that, one moves forward. So, once one
"anartha-nivṛttiḥ" is done, then one comes to "niṣṭhā". And then, one can start
practicing "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, you know, "rāgānugā-bhakti", now, we have to,
important, it is important to understand it is also in the jurisdiction of
sadhana. Sometimes, with, we think that "rāgānugā" is actually, it is, it is
"bhāvaḥ". Or "prema". No. "bhāvaḥ" bhakti is the eighth stage. "prema" bhakti is
the ninth stage. Whereas "rāgānugā" is something which comes within the earlier
stages, only. So, it is a part of "vaidhi-bhakti". And it is important to
understand this point. Because sometimes, "rāgānugā" itself is mistaken to be
the goal. But it is not the goal. It is a part of the process. So, to understand
"rāgānugā" more clearly, Srila Prabhupada describes it in his summary study. We
will look at the sans..., the relevant sanskrit verses. Which come in the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". And then, we will under..., we will look at the
concept of "rāgānugā-bhakti" better. So, Prabhupada mentions over here, you
know, that before we go to there, there:

"there is a stage called anartha-nivṛtti, which means the disappearance of all
material contamination."

So, without giving this "anartha-nivṛtti", you know, so, Prabhupada says, one:

"When one is actually spontaneously attracted to the loving principles of the
gopīs, there will be found no trace of any mundane contamination in his
character."

You know. You know. So, you know, if somebody is having mundane chara...,
attraction, then that person is not qualified for "rāgānugā-bhakti". We have
discussed earlier how, you know, the attract..., male-female attraction in this
world is like the reflection of the mango in a river. And the transcendental
attraction between Krishna and the gopis, that is like the mango in the ri...,
in the real mango. Above the river. On the tree. So, by jumping into the river
towards the reflection, one will only breaks, one, one's head if one hits a rock
under water. One will not get the mango. One has to come out of the river. And
then, climb up the tree. And then, reach the mango. So, as long as one is in
material illusion, one no longer has the tendency for material sexual
attraction. That means that one is jumping into the river. And one is going into
the river, then one cannot climb up the tree. And get the mango. So,
"anartha-nivṛtti" means, one understands that, ok, there is nothing in this
reflection. That the "anartha" is what? What does the word "anartha" mean?
"artha" means meaning. "anartha" means that which has no meaning. So, "anartha"s
cause us to see meaning where there is no meaning. What does "anartha" do?
"anartha" makes us see "artha" where the is no "artha". That is "anartha". So,
where there is no mango, you know, the "anartha" makes us see, oh, there is
a mango over there. There is pleasure over here. And that is how, we are
infatuated. So, "anartha-nivṛtti". Retirement of anarthas. "nivṛtti". The word
is used for retirement. So, retirement of anarthas means what? There are two
aspects to it. The, that the anarthas get retired. And we retire from the
service of the anarthas. So, first, we have to retire from the service of the
anarthas. Then, the anarthas will get retired. You know. You know. That means,
we have to start saying no to the anarthas. The lust comes and proposes. Why
don't you do this? Why don't you do? Come on. Enjoy. So, it is no. No.
Actually, of course, we do not stay busy saying no. No. No. We focus on saying
yes to Krishna. And that yes to Krishna fills our mind so much. That
automatically, a no to mMaya, no to the anarthas comes up. And eventually, when
we keep saying no. No. No. No. Again. And again. Then, what happens? Anarthas
see that, ok, the, here, there is no scope. This person is not going to fall to
my temptation. Anarthas go away. Just like, sometimes, some sales person comes
along. And say, he knocks on the door. Would you like to have this? He says no.
Maybe, after some time, again, would you like to have this? No. Would you like
to have this? No. So, once, twice, thrice. Like that. Once one says no. Once and
for all. Then, that sales person understands. Ok. I am not going to get anything
over here. I will just be completely wasting my time. So, like that. Or some,
another example could be that, suppose we had a, you know, you know, pet dog.
And we love the pet dog. And now, you know, you know, we understood that this
dog has got rabies. Very dangerous. Just by touching it, it may bite us. And
it, it may, and we may get a, get the terrible disease. So, may now understand,
I, I have to give away this dog. I have to push away this dog. So, for a long
time, we were petting, and then, fondling, and caressing that dog. And suddenly,
we push the dog away. The dog says, I, what is happening? Why are you pushing me
away? So, the dog, you know, comes back again. And then, again, we push away.
And then, dog comes back again. And again, we push away. And then, somehow, the
dog comes there. And again waits. And we think, oh, this dog is so nice. Once in
a while, if I fondle it, it does not matter. But if once we fondle it, then what
happens? The dog starts seeing, oh, my master still loves me. And then, ten
times, also, if we say, push the dog away. Still, the dog, last time, the master
fondled me. So, master is simply playing with me. And later on, he will accept
me. So, what, way out, what has to be done is, the dog has to be pushed away.
And nothing doing. No fondling. Just every time it comes, push it away. Push it
away. Push it away. Then, only, the pers..., dog will understand, oh, this
person does not want me. And then, the dog will go away. So, that is how lust
also works. You know. Like a petting, like a dog, which had been made into a
pet. Lust is like that. You know. We had ourselves adopted lust. When we are
materialistic, we try to find newer and newer ways to stimulate and agitate the
imagination with lust. And therefore I get some pleasure. So, we have fondled,
and caressed, and embraced lust. And then, when we understand, oh, oh, it is:

        mahāśano mahā-pāpmā
        viddhy enam iha vairiṇam

This is an enemy. This enemy, we have to give it up. Then, when we start, ok,
no. No. I will not indulge in it. So, you know, so, lust proposes. We say no.
Again, it says, no. Again, we say no. And then, finally, what happens? After a
few times of saying no, then somehow, we say yes. And then, oh, this person is
still, is ready to enjoy. There is a lot of scope to pro..., persuade this
person. And then, I, again, lust starts proposing forcefully. You know. So,
"anartha-nivṛtti" means a firm and persistent no. No means no. Nothing doing
means nothing doing. So, when that sort of "nivṛtti" happens, we retire from the
service of lust. And then, once and for all, it is a permanent retirement. It is
an irreversible retirement. And then, after that, re..., lust retires from
making its proposals to us. But lust will not retire before that. In fact, lust
will only do that afterwards. First, lust, first we have to retire from itself.
Is, then, lust will become tired of its proposals. And then, after it becomes
tired, then it will retire. So, that how, that is how it is to move forward. So,
"anartha-nivṛtti". Without "anartha-nivṛtti", to imagine oneself to be at the
level of, you know, spontaneous devotion is sahajiyaic. So, the, so, there are
people who, you know, are, as Prabhupada writes, they are having, act..., they
talk and act as if they are in Gopi Bhava. But then, they are, there is so
much male-female attraction over there. So, that is, that is a travesty. It is
actually a great, you know, atrocity against the exalted principles of, you
know, devotion which "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is talking about over here. Now, so,
Prabhupada was very cautious. And he put, even "Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati
Thakura" put "Rāgamārga". He says this is, this is what? You know. Puja for us.
It is to be worshipped by us. It is a very exalted "mār...", position. Although,
it is not the position of "prema". Still, it is an exalted position. And we
should respect it. And put it in a position of reverence. And by that, we can
gradually take it up. Gradually, if, as we become spiritually advanced, we will
develop that "rāga-bhakti". You know. So, now, coming to the point that
"rāgā-bha...", "rāgānugā" is also a part of "sadhana-bhakti". You know. So, just
as in "rāgātmikām", there was "sambandha-rūpā". And there was, you know,
"kāmā-rūpā". So, like that, here, also, there is "sambandha-rūpā". And
"kāmā-rūpā". So, we will go to that. But before that, let us look at, you know,
some of the concepts about "rāgānugā-bhakti". Which, you know, we are going to
talk about over here. So, here, Prabhupada talks about "siddha-praṇālī". So,
"siddha-praṇālī", what it is. And how it is mistaken. You know.

"They imagine that they have become associates of the Lord simply by thinking of
themselves like that. This external behavior is not at all according to the
regulative principles."

So, now, Srila Prabhupada, in these sentences, has concentrated a depth of
meaning. And to unpack this, let us look at the sanskrit verses of the
"Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". You know. So, before that, Srila Prabhupada mentions
"No Necessity of Discussing Further". Then, he says that:

"In the stage of devotional service where regulative principles are followed,
there is no necessity of discussing this love, for it must develop of itself at
a more advanced stage."

What does that mean? That one should not prematurely trespass into the realm of,
you know, "rāgātmikām" bhakti. Why? Because here, the goal is "rāgātmikām". We
ae not trying to talk about, you know, Yashoda Mayi's love for Krishna. We are
talking about how a "rāgānugā" bhakta, a devotee who is modelling once's love on
Yashoda Mayi's love, how that person will be able ot practice. It is not,
Prabhupada is not banning the discussion of "rāgānugā-bhakti". You know. He is
talking about "rāgānu...", the, the "ānug...", the not necessity of talking
about "rāgātmikām-bhakti" right now. So, now, you know, there are three, you
know, let us look at what is the qualification for practicing spontaneous
devotional service? So, here, actually, now, what has been talked about here,
you know, in the "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu" is also derived from the
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta". Because there is a conversation of "Rūpa Gosvāmī" with
Chaitanya, you know, with Chaitanya Mahaprabhu over there. So, let us look at
this verse.

        tat-tad-bhāvādi-mādhurye
        śrute dhīr yad apekṣate
        nātra śāstraṁ na yuktiṁ ca
        tal lobhotpatti-lakṣaṇam

So, "tat-tad-bhāvādi-mādhurye". So, "tat-tad-bhāvādi" means, according to one's
"bhāva", that is, you know, these five rasas are there. So, "tat-tad-bhāvādi".
"śrute dhīr yad apekṣate". You know. "śrute". When one hears about it, then
"dhīr yad apekṣate". "dhīr yad apekṣate" means one's intelligence becomes
attracted. His intelligence becomes attracted. And then, you know, "nātra
śāstraṁ na yuktiṁ ca". "nātra śāstraṁ". Though, one does not depend on the
instruction of "śāstraṁ". "na yuktiṁ". "yuktiṁ" refers to logic. And argument.
So, why should I practice bhakti? One does not need logical arguments. Nor does
one need scriptural statements. Then, what, what does one need? "tal
lobhotpatti-lakṣaṇam". "lobh...", you know, "lobhotpatti". When "lobh...", when
that "lobha" is there. When one cov..., starts coveting a particular type of
devotion. That is "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, let us look at this once again. So:

        tat-tad-bhāvādi-mādhurye
        śrute dhīr yad apekṣate

So, there are many pastimes of the Lord. And when we hear different pastimes.
Actually, these different pa..., there are, now, we may hear, say, Yashodi Mayi
tying up Krishna in Damodar lila. We feel very attracted to it. So,
"tat-tad-bhāvādi-mādhurye". So, like that, "mādhurye", there are various
"bhāva"s. And then, one when hears about it, "śrute dhīr yad apekṣate". So,
"śrute dhīr yad", hard, the intelligence becomes attracted. Say, a devotee
becomes attracted. Ok. I want to serve in the mode of ra..., "Yashoda Mayi".
Then, why do I want serve? Because there is an attraction. When there is
attraction, just even in this material world, also. When there is, what people
call as love, it is actually only a shadow of love. It is largely lust. But, you
know, people do not, people cannot listen to logic over there. The force of
logi..., love, you know, does not need any push from logic. Once the force of
love comes, so, it is so fast that, the, as compared to that, either the push of
logic, or the, you know, stop of logic. Neither work. Even one does not need to
be pushed in that direction by logic. Nor does one need co..., one can be
stopped. In that, even. Just moves forward. So, it is a far higher force. So,
this is just a shadow. And the original is, when the relationship with Krishna.
So, when that, when, "tal", "lobh..." "lobha", "lobhotpatti". When that "lobha",
"utpatti". When that is awakened. And one does not "nātra śāstraṁ na yuktiṁ ca".
"na yuktiṁ ca". One does not need logic. Nor scripture. Now, one does not need
scripture does not mean that one does not care for scripture. They are two
different things. One does not have to, you know, you know, one does not have to
depend on scripture for getting the impetus for practicing the bhakti. One's
heart is attracted. And that is why one start..., gets the, started practicing
bhakti. So, one will still follow the scriptural rules and regulations. We will
discuss that later. But at this stage, when the attraction for Krishna is
awakened, and that makes one practice bhakti. That is, you know, sadhana, that
is "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, Prabhupada writes over here. The, so:

"These rāgānugā devotees do not follow the regulative principles of devotional
service very strictly, but by spontaneous nature they become attracted to some
of the eternal devotees such as Nanda or Yaśodā, and they try to follow in their
footsteps spontaneously."

So, now, when we say that they do not follow the regulative principles. That
means, does not mean that they do not follow means they neglect. No. They
follow. But their impetus for following is not the scriptural warning. Or the
scriptural statement. It is their attraction. So, they chant. They may, you
know, so, for example, we have sadhana-bhakti where we chant 16 rounds. Now, why
do we chant? Because our spiritual master has told us. And we have taken a vow.
But when a devotee has got taste. He has come to "rāgānugā" level, then that
remembrance of Krishna, and the desire to remember Krishna are so spontaneous.
That one does it, because one is attracted to it. Not because one is told by
scripture to do it. Now, what is the qualification for this? So, you know, let
us look at the qualificat..., to understand the practice of spontaneous
devotional service. We discussed about the qualification is that one has to have
pure spontaneous love. And no other attraction to material things. So, let us
look at the practice of "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, this is 1.2.294. You know. So, "2
"refers to the second wave. 294th verse. This is, you know:

        kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya
        preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam
        tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau
        kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

So, you know, "kṛṣṇaṃ smaran janaṃ cāsya". So, "kṛṣṇaṃ smaran". So, until now,
we have always talked about "yena kena prakarena manah krishna niveshayat".
Somehow, remember Krishna. So, here, there is a remembrance of Krishna. But
there is some special remembrance. "janaṃ cāsya preṣṭhaṃ nija-samīhitam". You
know. "janaṃ". "janaṃ" means a devotee. A dev..., a "kṛṣṇaṃ", "janaṃ". A devotee
of Krishna who is "preṣṭhaṃ". "preṣṭhaṃ" means very dear. "nija-samīhitam".
According to our attraction, you know, depending on whichever rasa, whichever
devotee we are attracted to, that devotee, you know, "tat-tat-kathā-rataś
cāsau". "tat-tat-kathā" means the "ra...", "kathā" of the "kath...", pastimes of
that devotee. And that devotee's relationship with Krishna. That devotee's
service to Krish..., Krishna. "rataś". That means one become absorbed in that.
"rataś" means absorbed. "kuryād vāsaṃ vraje sadā". While doing this, one should
always reside in "vraje". In Vrindavan. "kuryād vāsaṃ vraje sadā". So, there are
many stages for us. You know. We develop a habit of hearing about Krishna. And
in..., initially, some pastimes may attract us. Some pastimes may not attract us.
And we may, it may happen that, or some devotees may hear about some, so, some
devotees have been born and brought up in a culture where they were hearing
"Rama lila" earlier. So, they may think, oh, whenever I feel, hear Rama, and I
feel very attracted to Rama. You know. So, maybe, my "svarūpa" is in "Ayodhya".
It is not in Vrindavan. You know. We should not assume such things. It is
possible. But it is by no means necessary. In the initial stages, our attraction
may simply be cultural. It may not be spiritual. Cultural means, just like
sometimes, some children, you know, sometimes, some people, they go back to
some, you know, village where they had lived in the childhood. Or they had
lived, they had visited some relatives in childhood. Stayed for a few months,
over there. In vacations. And after many years, they go back. That, that, the
feeling of nostalgia. Oh, this was so nice. I was here. I say, I remember I have
been here. I was playing over here. We had gone here. So, that nostalgia has got
nothing spiritual. So, something similar may happen. Because we were in the
childhood. We have heard something about Lord Rama. And now, we hear about it
again. So, we think, oh, Lord Rama's pastime was so sweet. I want to hear about
them more. And more. Now, that does not mean that our "svarūpa" is with,
necessarily with Lord Rama. This is simply cultural attraction. It is not
necessarily spiritual attraction. Based on our childhood culture. Again, that
attraction is surfacing. You know. So, only when we are purified of our material
conditionings. And actually, even for "śāntarasa", the qualification is complete
detachment from matter. And complete attachment to Krishna. That can come only
after "anartha-nivṛttiḥ". So, then, we will start getting attracted. So, when we
hear Krishna's pastimes, at that time, oh, this particular associate, you
know, you know, charms my heart. And then, we want to hear more and more about
that associate. Learn more and more about how that devotee serves Krishna. And
when we learn that, and absorb ourselves in service to Krishna in that mood, of
that devotee. And then, what happens? That is the time when, that is how
"rāgā-bhakti" starts. So, first stage is that we hear about a particular
devotee's pastimes with Krishna. And that particular devotee's service to
Krishna. That particular devotee's relationship with Krishna. So, after this
starts happening, then let us see what happens in the next stage. You know. So,
Prabhupada translates this elab..., in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You know. That he
explains this "kuryād", now, "kuryād vāsaṃ vraje sadā". So, you know, we have
discussed how Srila Prabhupada often integrates the purport and the translation.
So:

"one should live in Vṛndāvana."

And then, he says, however:

"If one is physically unable to go to Vṛndāvana, he should mentally live there."

"mentally live there". So, actually, mental presence in Vrindavan is far more
important than physical presence. Physical presence is also wonderful. But even
more essential is mental presence. Or heart should be attracted to Krishna. Or
thought should be focused on Krishna. In the mood of Vrindavan. And that is
possible everywhere. You know. It is possible outside Vrindavan, also. If we
have developed a small bond of attract..., small, strong bond of attraction
towards Krishna. And towards Krishna in Vrindavan. You know. So, Srila
Prabhupada established branches of Krishna Conscious movement all over the
world. And sometimes, some devotees wanted to say that, you know, we just want
to go and live in Vrindavan. So, then, devotees were living in Vrindavan, they
thought, ok, we can just chant "Radhe Radhe, Shyama Shyama". And we can wander
around in Vrindavan dancing in ecstasy. But Prabhupada told them, construct
temples. You know. You know. So, get, purchase cement. And make plans for
architectures. They thought, what is this? We came, we have to practice bhakti.
What are we doing? Prabhupada said, this is how you will make spiritual
advancement. The essence of bhakti is not doing what we get enjoyment in doing.
The essence of bhakti is giving enjoyment to Krishna. And to have a beautiful
temple of Krishna in Vrindavan, we will give a lot of enjoyment to Krishna. And
that is how we will get real spiritual enjoyment. So, the point is, we cannot
prematurely jump to advanced stages. Certainly, you know, we would like to be
absorbed even in maddened remembrance of Krishna. But that is not artificial.
That comes once we have come to advanced stages. So, wherever we are, we render
service to Krishna. With the internal remembrance of Krishna and Vrindavan.
Gradually, this absorption will come, and then, attraction to a particular
associate will come. And then, we will start hearing more and more about that
associate. And then, after that, what happens? The next verse. So, this is BRS
1.2.295.

        sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi
        tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

"tad-bhāva-lip...", so, "sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa". So, there is "sādhaka-rūpa". And
"siddha-rūpa". Let us see what refers to. You know. "tad-bhāva-lipsunā". "kāryā
vraja-lokānusārataḥ". So, "sādhaka-rūpa". And "siddha-rūpa". What does this
refer to? This is something which is, which is often misunderstood. And we have
to understand it very carefully. See, of, now, if we consider, you know, there
is, there are the, there is "Gaura lila". And there is "Krishna lila". And many
of the associates of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, almost all the important
associates of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, they are already presence in "Kri...",
in "Krishna lila". And they are generally in "Krishna lila". For example, we
have, say, Rup...", "Rupa Manjari". So, she is an associate of Srimati
Radharani. And she is present in, you know, Gaura lila as "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, in
this particular, you know, verse, the meaning that "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is giving is
that "siddha-rūpeṇa". "sādhaka-rūpeṇa". So, "siddha-rūpa" of that devotee is,
Radharani. Is, sorry, is, you know, you know, Rupa Manjari. And the
"sādhaka-rūpa" is "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, when we are meditating on that particular
exalted associate of the Lord, you know, so, the idea is, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is
telling that we meditate on both. The "sādhaka-rūpa". And "siddha-rūpa". You
know. So, when we are doing "sādh...", when we are actually acting over here.
Then, you know, the, so, just as those associates exha..., exist in both realms.
Rupa Manjari is there in Goloka Vrindavan. And "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is there in Lord
Chaitanya's pastimes. And both of them are there. So, we meditate, internally,
we can try to cultivate the mood of, Srimati, of, say, Rupa Manjari. And by
cultivating the mood of Rupa Manjari, we can meditate on how Rupa Manjari,
manjaris are the special associa..., are, they have special associates in
Krishna's pastimes. There are gopis. And there are manjaris. So, gopis,
actually, they are slightly, they are of the conjugal age. They, they, they are,
they are at the age of puberty. And they unite with Krishna. And in that union,
there is the greatest ecstasy. The manjaris are slightly younger. And the
manjaris, actually, they do not, you know, directly unite with Krishna. They
assist the gopis. And when they assist the gopis, and when the gopis and Krishna
are performing pastime. And they are uniting, at that time, the manjaris
observe. And actually, because they have the selfless mood to serve. Therefore,
they just by observing the pastimes of Krishna with the gopis, they get great
ecstasy. In fact, according to some acharyas, they get greater ecstasy in
observing the union than in participating in the union. Why? Because
participating in the union, they are on one side. They are, they are, ok, the
gopis, they are uniting with Krishna. But when they are observing, they can see
from, they can see Krishna's ecstasy. They can see the gopis' ecstasy. And they
can get immense ecstasy by that. Of course, these are very exalted subjects. And
we cannot, you know, prematurely rush into it. But the point is, the manjaris,
they are younger. And they, you know, have their special role in Krishna's
pastimes. So, now, Rupa Manjari has a particular service in the spiritual
world. So, "se...":

        sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra

So, "sādh...", "siddha-rūpa" means if a devotee is attracted to Rupa Manjari,
then that devotee will meditate on Rupa Manjari internally. And contemplate how
Rupa Manjari serves Krishna. And the same time, that devotee, externally, will
see how "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is serving. Because "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is acting as sadhaka.
He has, of course, he is a "paramahamsa, nitya-siddha". We could say, all those
epithets. For the great soul. And they are true. But the way "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is
living, you know, he is living not as a, he is not "siddha". He is living as
sadhaka. You know. He is, that is why they perform, goswamis perform such
austerities. They would live under different trees. And they would eat meager
food. And, you know, chant and follow the rules of bhakti with such, you know,
you know, immense rigidity. And, you know:

        sańkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ

"sańkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna". That very cur..., meticulously, keeping track of
the numbers they would chant the holy names. So, they would, they, basically,
the Goswamis demonstrate sadhakas. You know. Sadhaka life. Of course, their
sadhak..., sadhana standards are very high. They are mind-bogglingly high for
most of us. But still, the point is they are referring, they are presenting
sadhaka life. So, we remember now, we are discussing sadhaka. But what kind of
sadhaka? In "sadhana-bhakti", there is "vaidhi-bhakti". And there is
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, we are talking about "rāgānugā-bhakti" over here. So, you
know, "rādhā-kṛṣṇa", so, pem..., "sammohitau". They, so, they would sometimes
become "un matta". They would become "sammohitau".

        ... guṇa-smṛter
        madhurya  manande na sam mohito

So, when they would remember the qualities of Radha and Krishna, "guṇa-smṛter".
Then, "madhurya manande". The sweetness of those qualities. And the
corresponding pastimes. "anande na sam mohito". They had become completely
overwhelmed by that. And when they become overwhelmed by that, then that
becoming overwhelmed, you know, enables them to, you know, that, you know,
completely transports them to a different realm. So, we can, you know, this is,
they say the, service, devotional service which the Goswamis perform, is
described in, you know, see, "Sad-Goswamyastakam" by "Srinivasa Acarya". So, one
can meditate on that. When Srila Prabhupada gave sannyasa to "Hrudayana
Maharaja".  "Hrudayana Maharaja" asked about, how can I know, how I should
practice sannyasa? So, Prabhupada told him, study the "Goswamyastakam" very
carefully. "Sad-Goswamyastakam". There, you will understand the mood of a
sannyasi. So, the point is, we can, "sādhaka-rūpeṇa". So, the devotee should
external..., internally contemplate the service of the gopis. Of say, Rupa
Manjari. And externally, contemplate the service of "Rūpa Gosvāmī". And
externally, act accordingly. Very strictly, determinately practicing serv...,
you know, devotional service. In the mood of a sadhaka. And in this way, one
should render service. Now, in "siddha-pranali", there is a confusion that
happens. You know. So, "vraja-lokānusārataḥ". "vraja-lokānusārataḥ". So, in this
way, one should follow in the footsteps of the "vraja-lokā". "vraja-lokā" means
the past..., the, those who are in Vrindavan, we should follow in their
footsteps. So, now, there is "siddha-pranali". You know. What is the
"siddha-pranali"? You know. You know. Actually, the word "siddha-pranali" has a
very simple meaning. "siddha" is liberated souls. "pranali" is, like the
sequence. Or the list. "siddha-pranali" means that the, the list of liberated
souls. Of course, the word can have many meanings. So, there have been many
liberated souls. And the, our parampara itself is a, you know, sequence of
liberated souls. Now, but in the "siddha-pranali" mantra, what they do is,
they, the, the, those who misinterpret this, they assume, they, they, they, they
have two misconceptions. First is, "vraja-lokānusārataḥ" means, ok, we have to
follow in the footsteps of the "vraja-lokā". But they assume that the
"vraja-lokā" refers only to the "vraja vasis". And they do not accept the fact
that the "vraja vasis", also, that that the siddhas who are there in Vrindavan
lila, they also have a "sādhaka-rūpa" in "Gaura lila". They do not accept that
point. Or they do not consider that point relevant to the understanding of this
verse. And they say that, actually, when we have to do "vraja-lokānusārataḥ",
that means, in "siddha-rūpa", and in "sādhaka-rūpa", both we have to do
"vraja-lokānusārataḥ". That means, we have to, we have to, you know, sort of act
according to, or imitate the actions of the "vraja vasis" in both, by, ex...,
ext..., internal as well as external, you know, moods and actions. So, because
of this, what happens is, you know, there may be men. And those men cons...,
think that ok, I am a gopi in the spiritual world. So, internally, they try to
cultivate the mood of a gopi. And externally, they will wear a dress like a
gopi. You know. They will dress like a female with saari. And bangles. And nose
rings. And their males, you know, this, this is qua..., very artificial.  This
is not at all what "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is telling over here. You know.

So, one is not meant to, you know, imitate externally. Why? There is no need to
imitate externally. Because actually, the body has got nothing to do with the
soul. The body is just something which we have got by our past karma. And just,
so, the soul is different. What has to be done is, the soul's original nature
has to be brought out. So, by changing what is, the, the, around the soul, there
is a body. You know. Around, putting a, some further covering on the body is not
going to revive the nature of the soul. It is artificial. You know. This is not
what is recommended. So, there is "Gopi Bhava". And there is "Gopi Rupa". So,
what is important is that we cultivate the "Gopi Bhava". And the "Gopi Bhava"
cultivation is also what? Actually, the mood of service. Service. Selfless
service to Krishna. And to Krishna's devotees. And when we cultivate that, then
as we become purified, and become liberated, then the "Gopi Rupa" will manifest.
So, the "siddha-pranali", those who misinterpret it, they say that, you know,
we assume, take on the "Gopi Rupa", by wearing those dress. And ornaments. and
cosmetics. And things like that. And it, it is complete misunderstanding. Our
acharyas have never supported this idea of, you know, of imitating physically
the dress and the, you know, gar..., and the, you know, garments, ornaments. And
the behavior of the gopis externally. No. Internally, it is to be done. And
externally, we continue, you know, participating in Vrindavan lila as the, you
know, you know, as we continue participating in our service to our spiritual
master, you know, according to the way, the sadha..., so, the great "siddha"s
are doing in the "sādhaka-rūpa". "siddha"s are doing, in the "sādhaka-rūpa"
means, the way "Rūpa Gosvāmī" is doing in his, you know, in his service to Lord
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. So, this is the misinterpretation which has to be
corrected. "siddha-pranali", the way it is commonly misinterpreted is not
supported by shastra. It is based on a wrong understanding shastra. Now, let us
look at the progression. First verse is talking about, ok, hear about a
particular associate. Second is, ok, start serving in the mood of that devotee.
Internally, in the way that associate is a "siddha". And externally, the way
that associate as a sadh..., sadhaka. Serve in this way. And then, what will
happen? That is described in the next verse. So, Prabhupada writes that, you
know, you know, you know, you know, so, Prabhupada writes about these things.
You know. You know. How do we act externally?

"A devotee who is actually advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who is constantly
engaged in devotional service, should not manifest himself, even though he has
attained perfection. The idea is that he should always continue to act as a
neophyte devotee as long as his material body is there. Activities in devotional
service under regulative principles must be followed even by the pure devotee."

That means what? The "rāgānugā" devot..., if somebody is a "rāgānugā" bhakta. It
is not that, he should put a label on the forehead. "rāgānugā" bhakta. Offer
dandavat. No. Not like that. One should act as a, like a neophyte devotee.
Neophyte does not mean that one keeps succumbing to the anarthas. Neophyte
devotee, when Prabhupada is using the word, he means that, we should follow the
rules and regulations strictly. As we were following in the neophyte stage. That
means, in a..., when, as when as participating, practicing "vaidhi-bhakti", one
follows, when one is also in sadhana-bhakti. And then, after that, now, let us
look at the third verse. You know. You know. Yeah. So, this is 1.2.296:

        śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu
        yāny aṅgāni ca tāny atra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

"manīṣibhiḥ". So, you know, "vijñ...", "vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ". "manīṣibhiḥ"
means those who are knowers. Learned acharyas. As translated. "vijñeyāni". They
know what? That the 60, "vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu". Whatever are the limbs of
"vaidhi-bhakti", like what are the limbs like, "śravaṇotkīrtanādīni". So, like
"śravaṇ". And "kīrtan". These limbs of bhakti, "yāny", you know, "yāny aṅgāni ca
tāny atra". So, these "aṅgā"s are also useful in "rāgānugā-bhakti". What does it
mean? You know. You know. Even, one starts coming to the "rāgānugā" level, it is
not that suddenly, sta..., the devotee starts doing something new. No. The
devotee will continue hearing. And chanting. The way, you know, a sadh...,
"vaidha" s..., bhakta is sta.., the, hearing. And chanting. But while doing
this, that devotee will do something special, also. What is that? That devotee's
hearing and chanting will be focused on something specific. What is that? That
specific focus will be the particular devotee, who is the "rāgātmikām" devotee,
on whose model that devotee is trying to become, practice "rāgānugā-bhakti". So,
if somebody is attracted to Yashoda Mayi. Then, one will want to hear more and
more about the pastimes of Yashoda Mayi. And in this way, you know, one does not
give up the sadhana bhakti. "vaidhi", sadha..., "vaidhi-bhakti" limbs. But those
"vaidhi-bhakti" limbs become focused. Concentrated on particular actions. On
particular, on particular associates. And their particular actions. And in this
way, the, say, "rāgānugā-bhakti" is not necessarily a, you know, different in
form, you know, from "vaidhi-bhakti". It is different in focus. In
"vaidhi-bhakti", we will do general hearing. In "rāgānugā-bhakti", we will do
focused hearing. And in this way, "rāgānugā-bhakti" is to be practiced. So, the
first verse talks about hear about that associate. Second is that, ok, serve
externally and internally in the mood of that associate. And third verse is
talking about continue the activities of "vaidhi-bhakti", also. But do them with
a focus. On that particular associate. In this way, "rāgānugā-bhakti" is to be
practiced. And once one practices "rāgānugā-bhakti" in this way, you know, then
one starts, you know, there is also sadhana. And by the sadhana-bhakti,
gradually one will come to bhava. You know. So, Prabhupada writes that, you
know, how Prabhupada phrases this is:

"learned ācāryas recommend that we follow the regulative principles even after
the development of spontaneous love for Kṛṣṇa."

This means, regulative principles means hearing and chanting. But what is the
specialty then?

"one should specifically engage himself in the type of devotional service for
which he has a natural aptitude."

So, the difference is not in form. The difference is in focus.

"In this way, everyone should act according to his particular taste."

You know. So, now, we come to "kamanuga". And "sambhandanuga". So, earlier, we
discussed about how in "rāgānugā-bhakti". In "rāgātmikām-bhakti", there was
"sambandha-rūpā". And there was "kāmā-rūpā". So, corresponding to
"sambandha-rūpā", there is "sambhandanuga". And corresponding to "kāmā-rūpā",
there is "kamanuga". What does this mean? This means that, those devotees who
are in, you know, you know, those eternal associates, who are, you know,
"kāmā-rūpā". Those who are attracted to Krishna in the "madhurya-rasa". In the
conjugal rasa. Then, for them, if one, if they are our "rāgātmikām" bhakta
model. Then, our bhakti will be "kaman...", "kamanuga". In "rāgānugā", it will
be "kamanuga". So, now, further, it is explained that in this "kāgātmik...",
"kamanuga", there are two ways. Because the, the devotion of the pure devotees,
in the madhurya-rasa is itself in two forms. There is "svakīya". And there is
"parakīya". "svakīya" means one's own. "parakīya" means someone else's. "para",
"para" itself means someone else's. So, "svakīya" is the queens in Vrindavan.
Sorry, the queens in Dwarka, they are Krishna's wedded queens. They are
Krishna's own. And their relationship is, you know, in "svakīya-bhava". And the
relationship of Krishna with the gopis of Vridavan is in "parakīya-bhava".
"parakīya-bhava" means, it is out of wedlock. And out of wedlock, it is actually
considered to be a purer, greater love. Why is it greater? Not because it is, in
this world, if a man and femal..., woman have a relationship outside of
marriage, that is considered immoral. But with respect to Krishna and gopis, it
is not considered immoral. Actually, it is transmoral. So, there are, there are
three levels. Immoral means below morality. Then, there is morality. But that
which is far above morality. That is transmoral. The gopis' relationship with
Krishna are transmoral. They are far, they are transcendental. And there is a
transcendental morality involved in that. So, what is the speciality? Actually,
you know, when we talk about devotion, purity of devotion is that not only is
one ready to give up the bad for Krishna's sake. But one is also ready to give
up the good for Krishna's sake. So, give up the bad means we give up sinful
activities for Krishna's sake. But give up the good means that we have to give
up punya, also. So, for a woman, you know, chastity, faithfulness to her husband
is considered to be a very great virtue. But for the sake of Krishna, one should
be ready to give up one's chastity, also. And that is a supreme sacrifice of the
gopis. So, there is in that unwed love, or wed love out, not unwed, not just
unwed love, love outside wedlock, that means there is wedding somewhere else.
But there is outside lock. There is a special excitement. There is special
adventure. You know. There is, how it is is, see, if an elephant, you know, has
a lot of strength. But the elephant does not realise his strength. Say, elephant
does not strut..., and is attracted to, you know, the elephant of the opposite
gender. Say, a male is attracted to female. And the male wants to run towards
the female. If there are no obstacles, the male will just run like that. But if
the male is tied, by strong ropes, then the male pulls. And pulls. And pulls.
And when it, it is in, it is in the run, once it runs toward the female. And
then, it is in, you know, pulling. So, what happens is, the ma..., elephant has
strength. But it does not realise its strength.

So, when there is the, when the rope is tying it, then there is internal
realisation. And external expression of that strength. So, the elephant itself
does not know how strong it is. But when it is impelled by that desire, to go
towards the female. And then, it pulls, and pulls. And then, oh, I can bring
down this. If the rope was tied to a tree. I can bring down this tree. So, there
is internal realisation. And along with that, there is what? People may not know
how tr..., strong the elephant is. But then, when the elephant pulls. And the
trees start toppling over. Oh, how I was so strong. There is external
expression. So, people, it is expressed for the world to see. And it is realised
for oneself to know, also. So, like that, that incr..., the, the, now, the, what
are we comparing here? The, you know, the elephant is compared to the nuts of,
of worldly relationships. So, the gopis are married to someone else. And that
restricts them. When Krishna is playing the flute. And He say..., calling all of
them. Then, the gopis cannot go.

        pati-sutānvaya-bhrātṛ-bāndhavān
        ativilaṅghya te ’nty acyutāgatāḥ
        gati-vidas tavodgīta-mohitāḥ
        kitava yoṣitaḥ kas tyajen niśi

In the Gopa Gita, they are praying, gopis that, you know, we have left all our
associate..., you know, you know, of our relatives.
"pati-sutānvaya-bhrātṛ-bāndhavān". We have left all our, you know, associates.
All our relatives, rather. And we have come for your sake, Krishna. So,
actually, it was not easy. So, there was opposition. But the gopis overcome that
opposition in "kāmā". And in that way, there is internal realisation. External
expression of the intensity of their love. So, it is not immoral. Because
ultimately, you know, the gopis, the wives do not belong to the husband.
Husbands do not belong to the wives. The hus..., wives and husbands, all belong
to Krishna. Ultimately. So, you know, what is Krishna's? Krishna is calling and
taking. There is no..., no..., nothing immoral in it. You know. You know. Now,
when Krishna calls to the gopis, this is, you know, it is "parakīya" rasa. It is
considered a more exalted. Because there is sacrifice even of the good. For the
sake of Krishna. So, some devotees may be attracted to Krishna. That
attract..., "rāgātmikām" may be in the, you know, "parakīya-bhava". And for
some, it may be in the "svakīya-bhava". About both are possible. And both, the,
so, "rāgātmikām" mode is in "svakīya-bhava". Then, the "rāgānugā", who will be,
in "rāgānugā-bhakti", there is "kamanuga". That "kamanuga" will be in "svakīya".
And if the "rāgātmikām" is in "parakīya", then the, you know, "kamanuga" will
also be in "parakīya". You know. That means the, so, "rāgā...", if we were very
confused, "rāgātmikām" means the perfection of spontaneous love. "rāgānugā" is
the practice of spontaneous love. So, if the perfection, or spontaneous love, is
"parakīya". Say, it is a gopi in Vrindavan, then the practice of spontaneous
love will also be similar. It will also be in "parakīya-bhava". Like that,
actually, one moves forward. And advances in the path of devotion. Now, you
know, you know, now, let us look at this further. So, now, in the
"rāgānugā-bhakti", we discussed there is "sambandha-rūpā". "sambandha-rūpā"
means, the other two rasas, Vatsalya. And Sakhya. Friendship. And parental. And
"kamanuga" is conjugal love. That is madhurya. Now, "kamanuga" can also have two
types. Now, which is, until now, we have talked about "svakīya". And "parakīya".
But this is not "svakīya". And "parakīya". This is something different. This is
"Sambhoga icchamayi". And then, "Tat-tat-bhava-icchatmika". "Sambh...", so,
this is as sp..., as translated, mood of the heroine. And mood of the heroine's
maid. What does this mean? "Sambhoga icchamayi" means that the, you know,
devotee wants to render service in the mood of wanting to unite with Krishna.
Wanting to unite with Krishna. And that is the mood of a gopi. And then,
"Tat-tat-bhava-icchatmika"" means, that means that the devotee does not want to
unite with Krishna. That, that, the, rather, the devotee is not considering
oneself to be a gopi. One is cons..., devotee is considering oneself to be the
maid of the gopi. To the maidservant of the gopi. And one, devotee wants to,
wants the gopi to unite with Krishna. And then, in observing, that devotee
relishes that. So, that is also very exalted. That is also very pure. And that,
both of them are pure devotional ecstasy. Ex..., very exalted. But these are two
varieties. And there are different devotees who are attracted. We should not
think that one i.., uniting with Krishna is higher. And observing, the union of,
you know, union of someone else with Krishna is lower. No. Both are exalted. You
know. So, whichever is the one's natural attraction. That natural attraction
will awaken in our heart in due course of time. And in that way, we will become
att..., attracted to, you know, the particular devotee. And we will start
rendering service, you know, with that devotee as our "rāgātmikām" model. All
this will come gradually. Now, you know, we, now, if we look at it, let us go,
look at the "sambhandanuga". "sambhandanuga" means those devotees who are in,
you know, the mood of parenthood. Or friendship.

So, now, here, also, these two can be there. So, here, also, these two
categories will be there. Either one wants to, you know, take up that role of
being the parent. Or one can take up the role of, you know, watching, you know,
Krishna's par..., or of being an assistant of Krishna's parents. So, now,
actually, there is a danger. Now, wanting to be Yashoda Mayi. Or wanting to be
Krishna. Sorry. Wanted to be Nanda Maharaja, is dangerous. So, what is the
danger in that? You know. Ok. Before we go there, Srila Prabhupada talks about
"Eligibility in Males"? And it is not, so, now, when one wants to eligible,
Prabhupada gives the example of, you know, and "Rūpa Gosvāmī" gives the example
of "Dandakaranya" sages. So, one may think that if one wants to be having a
"kam...", "kamanuga". "kamanuga" means, attraction to Krishna, you know, in the
"madhurya-bhava". Male-female attraction towards Krishna. So, Krishna is male.
And the devotee is female. So, is that possible? You know. For somebody who is
in a male body. Yes. It is definitely possible. And the example is the
"Dandakaranya" sages. When the "Dandakaranya", when Krishna, Lord Rama was in
the "Dandakaranya", when he was in one vasa, he was at different places. First,
for the first few years, he went to "Chitrakoot". Then, he came to
"Dandakaranya". And when he was, you know, "Dandakaranya" is "Maharaja
Chitrakoot" is still North India, only. When he came to "Dandakaranya". And he
was living there, at that time, the sages were there. And the sages there saw
the Lord. And they saw the Lord's pastimes with, you know, "Sītā" Devi. And the
intimate love that they shared with each other. And in their heart, also, the
attraction was awakened. That we want to serve the Lord in a similar way. And
then, the Lord told them that, actually, I am "Marya...", I am "Maryada
Purushottama" now. You know. You know. But in a future lifetime when I come,
then I will accept you. So, it is described that the gopis who are present in
Krishna's pastimes, they were, you know, different kinds of gopis. Was it, so,
there, you know, "rsicharya gopis". "rsicharya gopis" mean..., it means those
who were rsis in previous lives. Those who were rsis in previous lives, they
come in this life. And they become the gopis of Krish..., they, gopi ing...,
some of the gopis of Krishna. Not all gopis. Some of the gopis of Krishna are
eternal associates. Who have descended with Krishna, when, from the spiritual
world. So, the point of this example is that our, you know, physical gender has
got nothing to do with our eternal "svarūpa". Somebody may be in a male form
right now. But still, they can have that "kamanuga" aspiration. As these sages
of "vaidhi...", "nitya...", "Dandakaranya" had. And at appropriate, and at
appropriate time, the Lord will make the arrangements to fulfill that
aspiration. So, after talking about this, then the talk, discussion moves
forward to talking about what the associates are doing. You know. Or rather,
now, it goes to other associates of the Lord. That means, apart from the, you
know, "kamanuga". "sambhandanuga". In the "sambhandanuga", you know, so, he
talks about "sambhandanuga". Also of two categories. It being the parent. Or
being the assistant of the parent. Now, being the parent is dangerous. Because
one wants to, in one sense, displace. Or replace "Nanda Mahārāja". Or Yashoda
Mayi.

One thinks, I will be "Nanda Mahārāja". I will be Yashoda Mayi. That is actually
almost like mayavada. You know. Because we want to take up a position of
Krishna. Or take up position, replace an eternal associate of Krishna. That is
not an aspiration that is considered proper. It is not considered devotional. It
is a re..., it is, you know, it is, you know, you know, not a exa..., not a
very good aspiration. So, what devotee is aspiring in this mood, primarily to
become associates o..., or become assistants of Krishna's, you know, parents.
And in that way, they can also attain perfection. So, if somebody has this
"rāgānugā" mood, then that will also be used. And then, Prabhupada, you know,
for this "sambhandanuga" sadhana-bhakti, Srila Prabhupada is telling over here.
You know. In an audi..., he is quoting from "Rūpa Gosvāmī"'s "biharyas".

"In the Skanda Purāṇa there is a story of an old man residing in Hastināpura,
capital of the kingdom of the Pāṇḍus, who desired Kṛṣṇa as his beloved son. This
old man was instructed by Nārada to follow in the footsteps of Nanda Mahārāja,
and thus he achieved success."

So, he was told what? To follow in the footsteps of "Nanda Mahārāja". So, this,
what is this referring to? This is referring to, you know, "rāgānugā-bhakti".
But "rāgānugā" not in the "kamanuga" mood. It is in the "sambhandanuga" mood.
And in that way, one can move forward. And attain perfection. Now, if we look at
the time when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared. And then, he gave the instructions
to, you know, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī". So, at that time, there was also the
"Pushtimarg" that developed. And in the "Pushtimarg", they also have very
similar concepts. So, this "rāgamārga" that the "mār...", "mārga", path of
spontaneous devotion. That is also called as "Pushtimarg" by some people. So,
Prabhupada refers to that. And earlier, "vaidhi-bhakti" is called as the
"maryada-marga". "maryada" means limitation. So, because, you know, one does not
have immediate, have attraction to Krishna. So, one follow, one is limited.
Circumscribed by scriptural injunction. And one acts accordingly. So, this is
how the "rāgānugā-bhakti" is practiced. And by this practice of
"rāgānugā-bhakti", either in "sambandha-rūpā" or "kāmā-rūpā", one can, you know,
or "sambhandanuga". Or "kamanuga". One can at, at, move forward. And attain the
bhava. And prema. So, you know, how do we come to this? We may see, we, ISKCON
devotees, what about us? Are we practicing "rāgānugā-bhakti"? No. Srila
Prabhupada explained to us that if we keep practicing our devotional service
sincerely, according to our level. Chanting 16 rounds. Following the four
regulative principles. The advanced stages of devotion will manifest. And more
important than advanced stages of devotion manifesting is that we will by
Krishna's, Chai..., Lord Krishna's, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's, and Prabhupada's
mercy, attain the ultimate perfection of life. How it specifically will happen,
that may not be very easy for us to conceive with our, you know, with our
brains. Which are so much conditioned. And contaminated. By various faults. But
it will happen primarily by mercy. But by understanding this profound analysis
of how there are so many, you know, so many pro..., so many deep levels of
bhakti. And tech..., you know, and relishable techniqualities in bhakti. We can
appreciate the glory of the treasure that we have been given. Entry into. And we
cherish that treasure at the level that we are at. And gradually, when we
promote it by Krishna's mercy. To higher. And higher levels. Until we attain
the supreme perfection.

Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
