Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2N1HDN-a6w
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_162_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_19_-_Prema_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3&redir_token=a9gzg57F-YhfFCwYWj3xsKDAvwl8MTU0ODQ5MDY0M0AxNTQ4NDA0MjQz&event=video_description&v=O2N1HDN-a6w

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to our, the last class of the Bhakti Shastri course,
We will be discussing Chapter 19 of "The Nectar of Devotion". So, before we go
into the chapter, let us, you know, once have an overview. Or a review of the
journey that we have gone through in "The Nectar of Devotion". Let us look at
the Eastern wave. Or the Eastern ocean. So, it is called
"Bhagavad-Bhakti-Bheda". The varieties of devotional service. So, among the four
sides of the ocean, we are covering, in our Bhakti Shastri course, this Eastern
Ocean only. So, in this, the first wave was Samanya-Bhakti. Samanya-Bhakti is
overview of devotional service. This was introduction and Chapter 1 of "The
Nectar of Devotion". That Introduction in Chapter 1 means, that we discussed,
you know, the Introduction. And then, the six characteristics of pure devotional
service. So, you know, "klesagni". "Subhada". All those things are in the part
of "Samanya-Bhakti". That the second wave was "sadhana-bhakti". Devotional
service in practice. This was Chapters 2 to 16. This was the major part of our
course. So, in this, we start from the first stages of devotion. And eligibility
of the candidate for accepting devotional service. And then, we discussed about
how devotional service, this is primarily a set of quotes. This is about how
bhakti is independent of everything else. And then, from here onwards, the
64, description of the 64 elements starts. From 6th Chapter onwards. Then, it
goes on until 13. Almost in 14, also. 14, Devotional qualifications basically
deals with, you know, the, you know, you know, relationship of bhakti with other
elements. Which have not been included in the 64 items. Then, these two, 15 and
16. These two talk about "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, that is, so, in
"sadhana-bhakti", there are two parts. There is "vaidhi-bhati". And
"rāgānugā-bhakti". So, 2 to 14 Chapters are talking about "vaidhi-bhakti". And
15 and 16 are talking about "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, both of them are parts of,
yeah, all of them are parts of, you know, 15 and 16, they are parts of
"vaidhi-bhakti". Now, from here onwards, 17 and 18, which we discussed in our
previous class. They are a part of the third wave. The third wave is called as
"bhāva-bhakti". That is devotional service in ecstasy. So, there is, you know,
three stages of bhakti. "sadhana-bhakti". "bhāva-bhakti". And "premā-bhakti".
They form the second, third and fourth waves of the Eastern Ocean. So, now,
"bhāva-bhakti", we discussed in our previous chapter. And now, we are going to
the fourth wave. Fourth wave is "premā-bhakti", devotional service in love of
God. This is called, the Chapter 19 in "The Nectar of Devotion". This is
"Devotional Service In Pure Love of God". Now, the description in Chapter 19 is
not very detailed. Because Chapter 19, because "premā" and "bhāva" are similar.
"premā" is basically a developed stage of "bhāva". So, whatever analysis is
given for "bhāva", applies, is, is in many ways, similar to the analysis that is
required for "premā". So, now, Prabhupada starts this by describing:

"When one’s desire to love Kṛṣṇa in one’s particular relationship becomes
intensified, this is known as pure love of Godhead."

You know. So, this is love, "pure love of Godhead". Now, let us look at this
from the point of our discussion in this chapter. We will look at the definition
of "premā" over here. So, devotional, fourth wave, "premā-bhakti". Devotional
service. Love of God. So, let us look at the definition that "Rūpa Gosvāmī"
gives.

        samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto
        mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ
        bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā
        budhaiḥ premā nigadyate

So, "budhaiḥ premā nigadyate". "budhaiḥ" means the wise. "nigadyate" means to
call. Or describe. They call this to be "premā". What is that "premā"? So,
"samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto". That means, "samyaṅ" means completely. "samyak", here,
the, when the "sandhiya" happens, it becomes "samyaṅ". "masṛṇita". Completely.
When the heart softens. In "bhāvaḥ", the heart is soft. But in "premā", the
softening complete. then, "masṛṇita-svānto". Compl..., "sva-antaḥ". "ant...",
it, once inside, it is completely soft. And "mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". "mamatvā"
means a sense of ownership. We will discuss what this means. A very significant
one. "ātiśayāṅkitaḥ". "ātiśayāṅkitaḥ" means, "ātiśayā" is a lot. Or abandoned.
"āṅkitaḥ". "āṅkitaḥ" is marked. So, that which is marked with a lot of feeling
of, you know, you know, you know, intense emotion. And "bhāvaḥ sa eva
sāndrātmā". So, "bhāvaḥ", "sānd...", "sānd...", "sāndrā", "sāndrātmā", we
discussed what it means, it means, condensed. Or concentrated. So, so, "budhaiḥ
premā nigadyate". This is called "premā". So, when that "bhāvaḥ" softens the
heart. "samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto".

"‘When that bhāva softens the heart completely"

And then, what happens to "bhāvaḥ"?

"becomes endowed with a great feeling of possessiveness in relation to the Lord"

"mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". It is marked with intense feeling of possessiveness.

"and becomes very much condensed and intensified,"

See, this is, "sa eva sāndrātmā":

"it is called prema [love of Godhead] by learned scholars."

It is, "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", "Madhya", 23.7. And "budhaiḥ premā nigadyate".
This is called as "premā". So, now, in this definition, let us look at again
the, you know, characteristics of this definition. The primary. And the
secondary characteristics. "samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto". So, Prabhupada writes about
this, then now, in his "Nectar of Devotion":

"In the Nārada Pañcarātra it is clearly stated that when lust is completely
transferred to the Supreme Godhead and the concept of kinship is completely
reposed in Him, such is accepted as pure love of God by great authorities like
Bhīṣma, Prahlāda, Uddhava and Nārada."

So, "Nārada Pañcarātra", it says that, the, when, what is happening is, the lust
is, you know, there is a famous prayer of Bhaktivinoda Thakura, where he says,
you know, that my dear Lord, just as, you know, the very intensity, you know,
you know, with which, my mind is attracted to the sense objects, let my nine
object be attracted to You. So, that is, we also discussed one prayer earlier
about how, you know, how a man is attracted to a woman. And a woman to a man.
Similarly, let me be attracted to You. So, this is actually the principle of
devotion. In fact, the principle of pure devotion. You know. Now, so, the,
actually, our material emotions are distortions. Of our original pure spiritual
emotions. So, what we have to do is, we have to draw our emotions back. But
we cannot just draw them back. We cannot live emotionless. So, we direct our
emotions towards Krishna. And when this redirection happens, completely, then
that is, you know, pure love of God. And Pra..., Prabhupada further quotes
"Bhīṣma" over here.

"According to Bhīṣma, love means reposing one’s affection completely upon one
person, withdrawing all affinities for any other person."

So, it is "reposing one’s affection completely upon one person". Now, earlier,
we discussed that aff..., affection for Krishna is not exclusivist. It is not
narrow-minded. Because sometimes, if I say, I love you, and then I say, I do not
love anyone else except you. That would mean that to love you, I have to cut
out, I have to cut out everyone else from my love circle. The, so, that may
happen. But with the, with the, if we love someone only in this world. But when
we love Krishna, because Krishna is connected with everyone. In fact, Krishna
intimately loves everyone. Therefore, when we love Krishna, our love flows
through Krishna to ev... through eve..., to eryone. But the focus is that we
have to focus our love on Krishna. And through Krishna, the love goes to
everyone else. So, that is why, you know, we see "Bhīṣma", he was very
considerate towards, not just the "Pāṇḍava"s. But, you know, he was also
considerate towards, you know, "Duryodhana". He tried to give him good advice.
And tried to gave him, get him, as much as possible. Tried as much as possible
to get him on the right track. So, in that sense, you know, a devotee is not
insensitive. A devotee is very sensitive about various issues. And tries to deal
with them properly. In the, in the, as if, because His love does not get
divorced from everything else. So, now, in this, the primary characteristic of
it, "bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā". That the, you know, what is it? It is when
"bhāvaḥ" becomes condensed. And intensified. It is "premā". It is "premā". When,
so, the, it is very intense feeling of love. And then, what is the, you know,
secondary characteristics? What I described earlier that
"samyaṅ-masṛṇita-svānto". "samyaṅ". It is complete softening of the heart.
Complete softening of the heart. So, in that sense, you know, it is, and again,
the same point is made. It is an intensification of "bhāvaḥ". But the other
point, point is very significant over here. "mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ".
"mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". This is a significant point. There are two modes of
relationship. You know. Or two moods which will also lead to modes. Two moods in
the relationship. Which is based on "tadiyatva". And "mamatva". "tadiyatva"
means that my dear Lord, I am Yours. "tadiyatva". You know. I am Yours. Now,
this is a very, this is itself an exalted level of surrender. Where one thinks,
you know, I do, we think that I am my own person. You know. I will do what I
want to do. I, I am free. I am independent. Now, you know, that feeling is, we,
it is ok. You know. In one sense, the modern, or post-modern toss male like
celebrate that kind of feeling. But we want that when one says that, you know,
so when we are, that is not a re..., that is not a feeling which is, you know,
conducive to devotion. You know. That is the feeling which is conducive to
bondage. And, you know, a continued existence. Material existence. In material
existence. Because we want to be connected with Krishna, constantly. Therein is
the perfection of our existence. Because in being independent, we may have a
feeling of freedom. But we will not have a feeling of fulfillment. Fulfillment
comes by the reciprocation of love. And for that, we have to have relationships.
And relationships means, there has to be subordination. Ev..., even in this
world, when we, per say, you know, I fall in love. We fall in love each other.
Fall in love. People do not stand in love. They fall in love. Why? Because there
has to be, whenever there is a loving relationship, there has to be
subordination. So, "tadiyatva" means, my dear Lord. I am Yours. So, we see this:

        mānasa, deho, geho, jo kichu mor
        arpilū tuwā pade, nanda-kiśor!

So, like that, Bhaktivinoda Thakur and other "ācārya"s have sung that My dear
Lord, everything, my, I am Yours. And everything that I have is Yours. This is
"tadiyatva". This is an exalted level of surrender. But higher than that is
"mamatvā". Not just that I am Yours, my dear Lord. You are also mine. You are
mine. What that means is, "mamatvā". You know. You are mine. And not just, You
are not just, You are, I am Yours. But You are mine. So, "mamatvā". You know.
"mamatvā". How does that work out? Yashoda Mayi, she is certainly, it is implied
that I am Yours my dear Lord. I am, she does say that I am Yours. But beyond
that, she can, it also implies that "mamatvā" means that I, You are mine.
Because Yashoda Mayi thinks, Krishna is my child. Not only is my child. He is,
actually, I am in, you know, you know, I have to take care of Him. He is mine.
So, she, because she thinks he is my child, so, she has to, you know, he has to
be well-behaved. He, he cannot just go around stealing from anyone. And
everyone. He steals butter. What will happen to his reputation? It is very bad.
So, that "mamatvā" is a very elevated stage of love. And here, we will see,
generally, we may think of possessiveness as bad. You know. It, you know, so
many times in the Bhagavad Gita:

        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sa śāntim adhigacchati

Bhagavad Gita says so many places. You know. So that, you know:

        vihāya kāmān yaḥ sarvān
        pumāṁś carati niḥspṛhaḥ
        nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ
        sa śāntim adhigacchati

So, in 2.71, He says, "nirmamo nirahaṅkāraḥ". You know. Become, give up the
feeling of "mamaḥ". Of possessiveness. And so, there are two mode..., great, two
modes of our illusion. One is the possessiveness. And the other is the
misindentification. "ahaṅkāraḥ". So that things connected with the body are
mine. And I am the body. So, me. And mine. "ahaṁ mameti". So, now, normally,
"mamatvā" is considered to be very bad. You know. As far as the normal
understanding of spiritual life is concerned. And "mamatvā" has to be given up.
But when we come to a very evolved understanding of spiritual life, you know,
actually, all, the, whatever emotions are there in the material world, they are
distortions. And we want to give up the distortions. But the way to give up the
distortions is by, not just rejecting them, but reverting them. Reverting them
to their original forms. And the, that rever..., reversion, to their original
forms is by, you know, purification. And by the process of devotional service.
So, when, that "mamatvā" is directed towards Krishna, it becomes very, it makes
the relationship very sweet. And intimate. You know. Radharani thinks that
Krishna is my Lord. And that is why if she sees that, she comes to know from
some sa..., some of her gopis that Krishna is with Chandravali. Then, she gets
angry with Krishna. And later on, when Krishna comes, she is angry. She says, if
you do not want to be with her, do not come here then. So, where, what is this?
This is possessiveness for Krishna. And this is very pleasing to Krishna. This
"mamatvā" indicates a very exalted level love of God. And it indicates, most
importantly, that one has got a personal relationship with God. It is an, and it
is not just a, based on a, or a personal, and intimate relationship with God.
You know. When we, you know, you know, think of God in the sense of greatness.
You know. We may think, oh, God is all-powerful. God is all-great. All kind. And
I just have to offer myself to Him. That is "tadiyatva". But "mamatvā" is much
deeper. Where ok, God, the God is great, all-powerful. All-great. But God is my
beloved. And we have a relationship. And in that relationship, there is a
feeling of possessiveness. And just possessiveness. "ātiśayāṅkitaḥ". His intense
possessiveness. Intense possessiveness. In fact, we see the Ratha Yatra
festival. Where the gopis, you know, are, what are they doing? They are taking
Krishna back to Vrindavan. That is the mood of the Ratha Yatra festival. You
know. From Kurukshetra, where the gopis have met Krishna, is their, in their
vision, they have made a cart. And they are pulling Krishna back. So, what is
the, what is the underlying sentiment we handed? You know. Krishna belongs to
Vrindavan. Krishna belongs to us, the "Vraja vasis". And we want Him back in
Vrindavan. You know. So, there, we have, there is "mamatvā". Now, in "mamatvā",
"tadiyatva" is not rejected. "taditva...", "tadiyatva", is present. But it is
subordinated. So, "Bhaktivinoda Thakura", in one of the songs says:

        āmi to’ tomāra,  tumi to’ āmāra,
        ki kāja apara dhane

So, he says, you know, you know, "āmi to’ tomāra". I am Yours, dear Lord. That
is "tadiyatva". I offer myself completely to You. But then, the relationship
with Krishna is not just one-sided. For the relationship to be truly relishable,
it is both-sided. So, "āmi to’ tomāra". Then, "tumi to’ āmāra". That You are all
mine. You are mine. And when I have You, what do I need anything else for? You
are the supreme possession. "ki kāja apara dhane". He says "apara dhane". What
other "dhane"? What other wealth do I need? Apart from You? So, the, so, devotee
is never poverty-stricken. Even when the devotee has nothing materially, he has
Krishna. And Krishna is the supreme possession. So, that way, a devotee is
supremely, you know, wealthy in that sense. It is a very exalted and intimate
feeling of proprie..., almost like proprietorship over the Lord. But that is the
nature of love. When love is there, you know, it is not proprietorship in the
sense of, you know, wanting to restrict the freedom of someone else. Or wanting
to dominate someone else. But it is more in the sense of, you know, loving sense
of mutual belonging. So, I belong to You. You belong to me. And that is how love
becomes very intimate. And intense. So, "tadiyatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ". Now, let us
move forward. Now, if we want to look at this further, there are two ways of
achieving "premā". One is by the maturation of "bhāva". And the second is by the
Lord's extraordinary mercy. So, here, this repeated mathematically, dramat...,
diagrammatically. Sorry. So, "premā" can come by mercy. That is "kṛpa". And it
can come from "bhāva". So, mercy is completely causeless. And mercy is
causeless. And supr..., it is just, need directly over there. And "bhāva", you
know, now, we have discussed earlier, "bhāva" can come from "vaidhi". And
"rāgānugā". And accordingly, the "premā" can be called as "vaidhi-bhavottho".
And "rāgānugiya-bhavattho". "rāgānugiya-bhavattho". So, that means what? From
"vaidhi" to "bhāva". And then, from there, one has come to "premā". And then,
from "rāgānugā" to "bhāva". And from there, to "premā". So, in that way, both
ways, one can come to "premā". So, this, Srila Prabhupada describes, from
"vaidhi":

“A devotee, in the course of executing the regulative principles of devotional
service, develops his natural Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and being thus softened at
heart he chants and dances like a madman."

And:

"While performing chanting of the holy name of the Lord, he sometimes cries,
sometimes talks wildly, sometimes sings and sometimes – without caring for any
outsider – dances like a madman."

You know. So:

        evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā

So, it is the famous verse in the Eleventh Canto. The, Prabhupada is
paraphrasing this verse over here in melody. This is being quoted by "Rūpa
Gosvāmī". Yes. "sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā". And then, means, means, glories the
Lord. And what is the mood in glorifying? "loka-bāhyaḥ". One does not care for
anyone else. He is completely intoxicated. Maddened by love of God. And such
sort of intoxication, maddening is the perfection of, you know, you know, love
of God. Now, the, this perfection of love of God, what happens is, the devotee
does not care for anything else. And this is the "vaidh...", "vaidhi-bhavottho".
So, "vaidhi-bhavottho" means through "vaidhi-bhakti", one gets to "bhāva". And
then, one gets to "premā". And why were we discussing about "bhāva"? We
discussed a couple of points. Which I would like to refer back. And then, we
will move forward in the, to "rāgānugiya-bhavattho". So, sometimes, we discussed
about how some devotees may feel spiritual emotions. So, if saying, young
sadhakas feels spiritual emotions, then, and that sadhaka, that, that person has
had any connect, contact with devotional service. Has not even done
sadhana-bhakti. Just a very new. And he is executing devotional ecstasy. What
does that mean? That means that is coming from previous lives. And that person
has done some sadhana in the previous life. And that is how, you know, just
continuing on.

        pūrvābhyāsena tenaiva
        hriyate hy avaśo ’pi saḥ

Krishna says in 6.44. One is helplessly attracted because of one's past
practice. So, that is one way that can happen. Now, when we are talking about
this, you know, "bhāva", this is sadhana-bhakti. "bhāva". And "premā". We
understand that this is a multiple lifetime process. By "kṛpā", it can happen
one moment. But a devotee does not depend on, or demand "kṛpā". Even when there
is "kṛpā", there is endeavor. Srila Prabhupada gives the example that, you know,
you know, Under normal process, for getting a PhD is, that one has to go, start
from junior KG. And, you know, from the, you know, kindergarden level. And then,
go through primary. Secondary. Then college. And then, doctorate. And then, one
may get a Ph..., and then, postgraduate. And then, graduate. Then one gets a
PhD. A doctorage degree. Now, you know, now, there might be some other person.
Who does some extraordinary performance. Somebody writes a, writes a, some
novel, which is, which becomes immensely popular. Which becomes globally
acclaimed. And then, because of that, I may be the, that novel gets a novel
price in literature. And so many Universities come. And start giving honorary,
you know, honorary PhDs in literature. Or something like that. For that writer.
Now, that is an exceptional thing. Now, one cannot, an ordinary student cannot
think, oh, I will get an honorary PhD. Now, then that person will, will, you
know, get none. Or they will get only a little dishonor. You know. No PhD at
all. At all. So, one cannot expect like that. One has to endeavor. So, "kṛpā" is
also one way one can get to perfection. But a devotee does not depend on, or,
you know, demand "kṛpā" as the only factor in perfection. A devotee endeavors.
Devotee follows sadhana-bhakti sincerely. And by that, the devotee shows
Krishna. Krishna, I want Your mercy. I beg for Your mercy. That means, when we
are practicing bhakti, it is not our bhakti that is leading to spiritual
advancement. It is, it is Krishna's mercy that is leading to spiritual
advancement. But along with that, our endeavor is also important. Just like we
have discussed, a person has fallen in a well, then it is the person outside who
is pulling the, pulling out from the well. But along with that, one has to hold
on. So, one holds unto the well. And then, the other person pulls out of the
well. You know. So, like that, one can move forward. And make spiritual
advancement. So, one does not depend only on "kṛpā". And sometimes, when we see
other devotees, very advanced spiritually, what we understand is that they have,
you know, they have done endeavor in their previous lives. So, we should not be,
you know, trying, that is not the mood of a devotee. You know. That we should
be, you know, we should not be trying to evade endeavor. And trying to, you
know, demand mercy. You know. That is the mood of a business. In business, the
idea is that, if, suppose, I want to bargain, purchase something. So, and I
bargain. Bargaining means what? I want to get as much valuable product as
possible. And I want to give as less money as possible. So, the business dealing
is, give as less much as possible. And get as much as possible. But that is not
the devotee's mood. You know. If we think, oh, I will not do any endeavor. But
"kṛpā", Krishna give the mercy. And then, I will get everything by that. Then,
that mood is non-devotional. You know. Earlier, we have seen how, by the mercy of
a devotee, one can get "bhāva". You know. You know. We discussed about "harda".
Or "vacika". Or "darsana-dana". By Krishna's mercy, a devotee's mercy, one can
get that. One can get to "bhāva". You know. We think, oh, I, why don't, why
don't devotees do that to me? You know. I will just go. And stand in front of
Krishna. And Krishna will give me darshan. And I will get "bhāva". You know. Why
doesn't it happen? You know. It can happen if Krishna wants. But demanding that
is not the mood of devotion. It is the mood of, you know, mood, co..., it is the
mood of basically comers. It is the mood of business. And, you know, I want to
give as less as possible. And get as much as possible. You know.

No. The devotee's mood is to give everything of oneself. Because that is the
nature of love. You know. if we have not habituated to giving everything of what
we have, then love itself will not have much meaning. You know. Love means that
we do not hold things back. Love means we offer ourselves completely to Krishna.
And Krishna also reciprocates the feeling our heart with, you know, more love
than it can hold. And that love floods over. And fills our life completely with
ecstasy. So, that is why a devotee does not demand the mercy. A devotee, you
know, strives. And endeavors. So, now, "vaidhi-bhavottho" is there.
"bhavottho" is there. And similarly, there is "rāgānugā-bhavattho". That means
one practices "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, basically, there is "sadhana-bhakti". There
is "bhāva-bhakti". And there is "premā-bhakti". So, we discussed earlier the
path from sadhana-bhakt..., you know, from sadhana-bhakti, to "bhāva-bhakti",
there are two ways. From "vaidhi-sadhana". And from "rāgānugā-sadhana". So,
similarly, the paths from, you know, we could say that the, the roadways that
come over here. If, instead of having it like two roadways coming here, you can
have two roadways coming here. And the same roadway continues over here. So,
from, sadh..., "rāgān...", some sadhana-bhakti, if one goes up by
"vaidhi-sadhana", then one comes to "rāgānugā". You know. And then, sorry, then
when one comes to "bhāva-bhakti". And from "bhāva-bhakti", one moves forward.
And comes to "premā". And similarly, there is another road. From sadhana-bhakti,
one is taking the road of "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, that same "rāgānugā-bhakti"
road comes forward, moves forward. And then, one comes to "rāgānugā-bhav...",
"rāgānugā-bhavattho". "premā". So, you know, through "rāgānugā" to "bhāva". And
then, from there to "premā". Now, this is the pathways to "premā". But along
with the pathways to "premā", there is also, there are types of "premā". There
are types of love. Let us look at what are the types of love now. Yeah. So,
before we move forward to the types of love, here, the example for "bhāva"
through "vaidhi-bhakti", we discu..., we discussed. Now, let us look at the
example of, you know, you know, "rāgānugā-bhavattho". So, Prabhupada, you know,
"Rūpa Gosvāmī" continues the example of "Candrakānti". From "Padma Purāṇa". So,
it is described that, you know, that one night, that, you know, that she danced
in the mood of the gopis. She was doing "rāgānugā", "Candrakānti" practiced
"rāgānugā-bhakti", striving to develop the mood of the "rāgātmikām" of
Vrindavan. Specifially the gopis. Then, she achieved "rāgā...", "viraktir" by
that. Became completely different from everything else. And by maturation of her
"bhāva-bhakti", she began to constantly engage in my meditation, Krishna's form,
in meditation on Krishna's form with the concept of Krishna is my lover. Thus,
the, this is "mamatvā". And it is the symptom of "premā". And then, Prabhupada,
you know, then, you know, here, it is quoted why. About "premā" achieved by
"kṛpā". This, Krishna tells Uddhava in 7.12.17 about the gopis. The, how did the
gopis get a pure love of God?

“The gopīs in Vṛndāvana did not study the Vedas to achieve Me. Nor had they ever
been to holy places of pilgrimage. Nor did they devoutly execute any regulative
principle. Nor did they undergo any kind of austerity. It is simply by My
association that they have attained the highest perfection of devotional
service.”

You know. So, you know, now, we may say, actually, aren't the gopis
"nitya-siddha"? Aren't, haven't the gopis descended from the spiritual world to
the material world? Yes, they have. But not all gopis. There are different
kind..., and in the, there are many different categories of gopis. Like it
start..., earlier, we discussed about the "rsicharya" gopis. Those who were
"rsi"s in "Dandakaranya". And then, they, you know, appeared in Krishna lila
later on. So, like that, there are different kinds of gopis. And some gopis,
they participate in Krishna Lila. And thereby, particip..., by participating
in Krishna lila, they attained perfection. So, when the gopi, Krishna calls
gopis to perform the rasa-lila. Not all gopis are able to come immediately. You
know. They experience obstacles. But different gopis are able to break free from
the obstacles at different times. And some gopis, who are not able to break free
from the obstacles, you know, they could, they could, they become desperate. And
they meditate on the Lord. And desperately long to be in the presence of the
Lord. And that longing burns away all their impurities. So, the gopis come out
at different times. Not all gopis are in the same category. So, here, it is
referring to those gopis, who may not have had love of God earlier. But just by
the association of Krishna, they developed love of God. Now, here, we go to
Vrindavan as a place of pilrimage. Then, why is it said that in this verse,
Krishna is telling "Uddhava", the gopis did not go to any place of pilgrimage.
Wherein they are living only in the place of pilgrimage. That is Vrindavan. Yes.
They are living in a place of pilgrimage. But the gopis do not think of
Vrindavan, necessarily, as a place of pilgrimage. For them, it is just the home.
The place that they were born in. So, when it is said the gopis do not go to a
place of pilgrimage, what it essentially means is that, you know, the gopis did
not practice the rituals of, you know, dharma too much. That, it was not that,
the, some people, for the sake of purification, they go to tirtha yatra. Ok. I
will go to this place. I will go to that place. I will go to tho..., that place.
The gopis were not going around like that. The gopis were born in Vrindavan. And
they were living in Vrindavan. So, what made them exalted was the association of
Krishna. They were so spontaneously, they were so deeply attracted to Krishna.
And by that attraction to Krishna, they developed, you know, more and more love
of God. Until they attained perfection. So, for them, the qualification was the
mercy of Krishna. By the mercy of Krishna, the gopis developed spontaneous love
for Krishna. Now, moving forward, you know, let us look at the two types of
"premā". So, there is "mahatmya-jnana". And "kevala". "mahatmya-jnana" is
"premā" mixed with knowledge of the Lord's majesty. And "kevala" is unmixed pure
"premā". So, Prabhupada writes that "premā":

"can be placed under two headings: one is profound veneration for the greatness
of the Lord, and the other is one’s being automatically attracted to Kṛṣṇa
without any extraneous consideration."

You know. So, profound veneration, that is "mahatmya-jnana". And "kevala" is,
"kevala" is, "kevala", unmixed pure "premā". So, now, let us look at this once
again. So, you know, now, what happens is, you know, from "vaidhi-bhakti", if
one moves forward. So, these are three stages of "premā". There is
"sadhana-bhakti". And there is "bhāva-bhakti". And there is "premā-bhakti". So,
normally, if somebody practices "vaidhi-bhakti", then from there, one will come
to "vaidhi-bhavattho". And from there, one will get to "mahatmya-jnana".
Similarly, if one practices "rāgānugā-bhakti", then one goes to
"rāgānugā-bhavattho, and one goes to "kevala". This is a progression which
happens normally. Of course, Krishna's mercy, anything is possible. Now, you
know, Prabhupada quotes from the "Nārada Pañcarātra", as per, as "Rūpa", as
"Rūpa Gosvāmī" is doing that:

"if on account of profound veneration for the greatness of the Supreme Lord one
attains a great affection and steady love for Him, one is certainly assured of
attaining the four kinds of Vaiṣṇava liberation –"

So, "mahatmya-jnana". "mahatmya-jnana" means that awareness of God's greatness.
And their love over there. But that love is within awareness of Krishna's
greatness. Now, if we see in the Damodar Lila, what is happening is, you know,
Krishna is being bound by a devotee. By Yashoda Mayi. And for a devotee, who is
in the "mahatmya-jnana premā", this is inconceivable. You know. How can you bind
Kri..., God? You know. God is the supreme object of love, you cannot bind God.
You have to, you know, you know, you have to be very respectful to God. But in
Satyavrata Muni only, when he is describing this, he is describing how Yashoda
Mayi's love is "kevala". You know. Yashoda, a devotee does not, she is not
thinking of Krishna in mood of reverence. She is thinking of Krishna as her
child. In fact, we see, there are such intimate pastimes at the level of
"kevala" that the prev..., you know, that sometimes, you know, Nandan Maharaja,
Yashoda Mayi, they bless Krishna. To, what do they do? You know. Kri..., when
Krishna the, comes. And does some service. Now, they say very good. Very good.
And they bless Him. And not only that. They are asking. You can, "Nandan
Maharaja" sometimes asks Krishna to carry his sandals. And Krishna puts the
sandals on His head. Now, from the normal point of view, you know, we, the, our
foot, you know, you know, our footwear is considered contaminated. And it, it
cannot even connect, come inside the temple. We keep it right outside the temple
when we go inside the temple. Then, if the footwear is meant to keep outside.
Even from the temple premises. What to speak of the altar premises? In the
temple, the place, where the deity is, is the altar. And then, what to speak of
the footwear going near the deities? And what to speak of the footwear going on
top of the deities. It is so, so, for a person, who has some understanding of
the, the nature and rules of deity worship? It is a scandalous thought. You
know. To take the footwear. And let it come anywhere. You know. Even in the
altar. What to speak of to touch the deity's head? But that is what Nandan
Maharaja is doing. Basically. And he is not only doing it. He is asking Krishna
to do it. Get my sandals. And Krishna puts on His head. And gets it. So, how
are they able to do it? Because their "premā" is "kevala". It is pure love.
There is no awareness of Krishna's divinity. Krishna's supremacy. They think
that Krishna is not God. They think, oh, Krishna is not just one of our spec...,
such a lovable, special "vraja vasi". You know. And even when they see Krishna's
extraordinary's power. When Krishna does something extraordinary. For a such,
you know, for, say, lifts Govardhan. Or something like that. At that time, there
may be a temporary awareness. Oh. This Krishna must be God. But then, aftewards,
they do not think of Him as God. That awareness gets covered. Just like in the
daytime, also, stars are there. But those stars are not visible in the daytime.
Because the sun is so bright. So, the stars are like the awareness of Krishna's
greatness. And the sun for the "vraja vasis" is like the awareness of Krishna's
sweetness. Awareness of Krishna's, their love for Krishna, basically. Without
an awareness of His position. So, because their love for Krishna is so great
that, you know, you know, you know, there, you know, that because of their love
for Krishna, they do not care at all for, you know, you know, Krishna's
divinity. Krishna's greatness. They just think that Krishna is one among us. And
as we have discussed earlier, the people pray to God. "vraja vasis" pray for
God. They pray for God. So, they do not think Krishna as God. They think, oh,
Lord Narayana is protecting Krishna. You know. Nandan Maharaja does worship of
Narayan. And because of his, of his piety in worshipping Narayana diligently,
Narayana is blessing Him. And Narayana is protecting Krishna.

And how is Narayana protecting? That when the demons come, at that time, Kri...,
Narayana enters into Krishna. And Narayana gives Krishna a lot of power. And
that is how Krishna is able to do miraculous things. So, the "vraja vasis",
their love is "kevala". They do not care for anything except loving Krishna. Not
for, you know, even for Krishna's, you know, supreme position. You know. And
this "kevala premā" is the perfection of life. It is, not just the perfection of
life. It is the perfection of all of existence in terms of the relationship of,
you know, the devotee and the Lord. You know. The idea that God will subordinate
Himself. And that the devotee will become greater than the Lord, itself is
extraordinary. So, we see in the "Damodarastakam", in the, so, first and second
stan..., stanza of "Damodarastakam" describe the pastime. "namāmīśvaraṁ". There
will be desc..., come..., you know, there, it con..., concludes with, you know,
that the gopi, Yashoda Mayi has tied Krishna. And then, after that is, "rudantaṁ
muhur netra". That Krishna is crying. And then, you know, you know, you know,
the third stanza describes what is being demonstrated by this. This verse, this
pastime demonstrates the contrast between "mahatmya", we could say, if with the
termi..., terminology of "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". "mahatmya-jnana premā". And
"kevala premā".

        itīdṛk sva-līlābhir ānanda-kuṇḍe 
        sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam ākhyāpayantam
        tadīyeṣita-jñeṣu bhaktair jitatvaṁ 
        punaḥ prematas taṁ śatāvṛtti vande

So, "itīdṛk". Just, you know, "itīdṛk". By this, by demon..., by showing this,
by letting the world see this, "sva-līlābhir", one's own pastimes.
"ānanda-kuṇḍe". We have heard about "Rādhākuṇḍa". "Shyam-Kund". Here, it is
"ānanda-kuṇḍe'. It is just, it is a lake of happiness. "ānanda-kuṇḍe".
"sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam ākhyāpayantam". So, he is declaring, by just drowning
his beloved "vraja vasis" in the ocean of happiness through pastimes like this.
What is he declaring? "tadīyeṣita-jñeṣu bhaktair jitatvaṁ". "tadīyeṣita-jñeṣu".
"tadīyeṣita-jñeṣu" means that those who are "jñeṣu". Those who are awarene...,
aware of, you know, so, "jnana" of His greatness. That those who are aware that,
oh, God is so great. That we have to bow down to Him. We have to worship Him
with great diligence. And rules. So, they are telling them that, ok, that is all
fine. But that sort of love will not win the Lord over the way, you know,
Yashoda Mayi won the Lord over. You know. That is possible as  "bhaktair
jitatvaṁ". That is possible only by bhakti. "punaḥ prematas taṁ śatāvṛtti
vande". "punaḥ prematas taṁ". So, again, with love, I offer obeisances. And this
love is so extraordinary. "śatāvṛtti vande". So, "Sanātana Gosvāmī" has written
a commentary on the "Damodarastakam". His "Dig-darshini Tika". And there, he
explains that this "śatāvṛtti vande", although he is saying, I offer hundreds of
obeisances to You. This is actually not in the mood of awe and reverence. This
is due to the spontaneity of love. That is flooding the heart of "Rūpa Gosvāmī".
That he is offering this kind of prayer. It is a, so, it is a, this pastime
contrasts love in reverence. And pure love. "aiśvarya jnana premā". And
"mahatmya". "aiśvarya". You know. You know. So, "mahatmya-jnana premā". And
"kevala premā". So, the contrast between the two is that, in "mahatmya-jnana
premā", one is more, more, the relationship with Krishna is not so close. And in
the "Caitanya-caritāmṛta", also, it is said that, there is
"aiśvarya-śithila-preme". That when there is "aiśvarya", when there is awareness
of "aiśvarya". "aiśvarya". Awareness of greatness. When that makes the "premā" a
little bit "śithila". "śithila" means it is not so alive. Not so energetic. You
know. You know. It becomes a little passive. Little cold. "aiśvarya-śithila".
So, for, if we want, you know, the vibrant love. Then that, then
"aiśvarya-jnana" has to be covered. And that is what Krishna does. So, Krishna
has His "Yogamāyā" in the spiritual world. And through "Yogamāyā", He covers the
devotees. But the devotees have such a great exalted level of love that they get
covered. You know. So, we should not think that, you know, just because
"Yogamāyā" is there, so, the devotees are covered. No. The devotees themselves
have that desire to serve Krishna with such intensity. And, you know, purity
that "Yogamāyā" acts on them. And then, "Yogamāyā" covers. So, "Yogamāyā" does,
in and off itself, you know, is not alone responsible. That devotees' purity and
intensity of love is also responsible. And together, this miracle happens where,
you know, where that devotee remembers God. And forgets his God only. The
devotee, what happens? Remembers God. But forgets his God, only. See, when we
are in "mahāmāya". we forget God. And we forget His Godhood. Then, when we come
out of "mahāmāya", what happens is, we try to remember God. And His Godhood. And
that means, His Godhood means, His position as God. And then, when we go into
"Yogamāyā", at that time, we remember God. But we forget His Godhood. So, His
Godhood means, His supremacy. You know. So, initially, for us, when we have a
seven, dependent enjoying mentality, it is good to remember. That Krishna is not
an ordinary person. Krishna is God. You know. Many people, you know, you know,
in one sense, if people are, you know, born in, say, a piou..., a pious sort of
culture. Say, people are born in India. In one sense, they know about Krishna.
You know. But they, they do not really know Krishna. They do not know
"tattvataḥ". They do not know Krishna. So, they do not know, they know, they may
know God without His Godhood. But their knowing God without His Godhood, so, the
nominally religious people, they know God without His Godhood. And the "vraja
vasis" know God without His Godhood. That sadhakas have to know God with His
Godhood. So, are the, you know, that means if you consider three levels. The
sadha, nominally religious people, they know God without His Godhood. It is
Krishna. Yes, we know. You know. You know. He, We know, He is, He is a hindu
god. And people, He used to steal butter. He used to dance with the gopis. We
know about Lord Krishna. That is what they think. But they do not really know
"tattvataḥ". They do not know really about, anything about Krishna. So, their
know...., their, their knowledge is very superficial. So, their idea of knowing
God without His Godhood, is they have to come to know about His Godhood. They
have to know about His greatest. His position. His power. And that is what
sadhana-bhakti is primarily about. That when we com..., we come to know about
God. And His Godhood. His supremacy.

But as the knowledge of His Godhood, you know, becomes richer and deeper, then
also we come to know about God in the intimate aspect. And there, there is, you
know, what is that? There, God conceals as Godhood. And then, there is love,
there, there, go..., the people know, God without His Godhood again. You know.
But then, when they know "vraja vasis", no people, no, you know, God without His
Godhood, what is the difference? Between them and the nominally religious
people? The difference is that the "Vraja vasis" have intense love for Krishna.
Whereas the nominal religious people, religious people have no love for Krishna.
So, that love is what, you know, i..., makes the defin..., is the defining
characteristic of, you know, the "Vraja vasis". So, og..., they have knowledge
of God without knowledge of His Godhood. And that makes it a very, very special
kind of love. A special kind of love. That is, that is, the love which is, you
know, in the Gaudiya Vaishnava, we are being offered. So, by practicing Krishna
Consciousness, by following the process of bhakti that our acharyas have told,
given us based on, you know, our, you know, based on our sadh..., Gaudiya
shastras, and the Vedic scriptures in general. We will attain, ultimately attain
this kind of exalted love. So, then, here, here, we see that, "Rūpa Gosvāmī"
describes the progression. Now, we have, you know, imp..., we had talked about
this progression in the implicit way earlier, also. And, you know, so, for, so,
know about it. This came earlier.

        ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-
        saṅgo ’tha bhajana-kriyā
        tato ’nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt
        tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ. 

        athāsaktis tato bhāvas
        tataḥ premābhyudañcati
        sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ
        prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

So, "sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ". This "premā". The nine stages. "śraddhā".
"sādhu-saṅgaḥ". "bhajana-kriyā". "anartha-nivṛttiḥ" is fourth. "niṣṭhā". Five.
"ruciḥ". "āsaktiḥ". So, "ruciḥ" is six. "āsaktiḥ" is seven. "bhāvaḥ" is eight.
And "prema" is nine. So, this "ayaṁ premṇaḥ". So, this "ayaṁ premṇaḥ". How will
one come to that? "prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ". Progressively, one will come to
that. And then, you know, you know, it is important to understand that we cannot
use, we cannot understand "premā" by externals.

"In the Nārada Pañcarātra Lord Śiva therefore tells Pārvatī, “My dear supreme
goddess, you may know from me that any person who has developed the ecstasy of
love for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and who is always merged in
transcendental bliss on account of this love, cannot even perceive the material
distress or happiness coming from the body or mind.”

Now, what, what is the need for making a point like this? We will see, yes.
Somebody is on the transcendental level. That person will, is transcendental.
So, does not experience anything at the body. Or the mind. But this is for our
understanding. The, generally, we, when we want to understand, we are trying,
you know, somebody, we will look at that person. And we say, how, how big is the
smile on the face of the person. How happy this person is. And based on that, we
think, oh, this must be, this person is happy. We just, we look at the external
expression, and by external that we try to think how happy that person is. But
this standard cannot work for a devotee in "premā". At one time, you know, you
know, in, you know, a devotee had clicked a photograph of Prabhupada. And then,
Prabhupada was seeing that photo. And the devotee said, Prabhupada, you look so
grave in this photo. So, Prabhupada said, that was a moment of ecstasy. A
devotee said, this is, there is no smile. It is just so grave. How can it be a
moment of ecstasy? So, Prabhupada said that, you know, actually, ecstasy is not
just dependent on the smile on our face. Ecstasy is dependent on our inner
remembrance of Krishna. To the extent we are remembering Krishna, to that extent
we are ecstatic. So, that is the primary characteristic of ecstasy. That we are
observed in remembrance of Krishna. And when we are this absorbed in the
remembrance of Krishna, then we do not need anything else. Completely satisfied.
And sometimes that remembrance in Krishna may lead to external, external crying.
You know. So, if we look at the life of the, life of the gopis, after Krishna
left Vrindavan. You know. They were, they were constantly crying in separation
from Krishna. And we may say, what is this? You know. You know. With, say, I
want to love Krishna. And by loving Krishna, I thought I will become happy. But
the topmost devotees of Krishna, what are they doing? They are crying
constantly. So, you know, as it is, I was crying in the material world. Do I
have to go through following all the regulative principles of bhakti? And then,
do so much di..., sadhana, and then, what is the perfection? That you cry for
the rest of eternity? No. No. No. No. There is a very peripheral, superficial
understanding. The gopis may be crying. But even their crying is filled ecstasy.
Because what brings ecstasy, you know, what is the central, central part, aspect
of spiritual happiness is not whether I am smiling. Or whether I am crying. The
central part of happiness is that I am remembering Krishna. If I am remembering
Krishna, that remembrance of Krishna itself is a source of happiness.

        sukhataram aparaḿ na jātu jāne
        hari-caraṇa-smaraṇāmṛtena tulyam

"sukhataram aparaḿ na jātu jāne". That actually, I do not know, "Kulasekhara
Mahārāja" is saying in his "Mukunda Mala Stotra" that I do not know of any
happiness other than the happiness of, you know, remembrance of Krishna. There
is nothing like that. This is such a great happiness. So, when I am remembering
Krishna, we should not think of remembrance of Krishna, as say, maybe, we saw
some sunrise long ago. It was very beautiful sight. So, remem..., you know, I
remember, I may be remember that sunrise. And feel, oh, it is so beautiful. And
feel some satisfaction. So, I think, remembrance of Krishna is like that. Oh. I
remember the sunrise. I remember Krishna. Like that. No. It is not like that.
Because the sun is basically, and, you know, ma..., passive object. At least to
our vision. We are just thinking of the sun, ok, it was there. And it moved up.
But Krishna is a living loving person. And our relationship with Krishna is
constantly evolving. And because, you know, you know, you know, it is evolving,
so depending on whether we are feeling the presence of Krishna. Or feeling the
absence of Krishna. Whether Krishna is with us. Or Krishna is away from us. You
know. The, the moo..., mood of emotions will change. You know. The mood of
emotions will change means that if Krishna is away from us, we will feel the
separation. And that separation, there will be agony. But although, there is
agony, un..., underlying that agony, is intense remembrance of Krishna. And
because there is intense remembrance of Krishna, there is ecstasy. So, we cannot
judge whether a devotee is at "premā" or not by externals. You know. So, yes,
as, you know, we generally, devotees are happy. Because they are remembering
Krishna. But sometimes, the remembrance of Krishna, you know, because it is not
just a passive remembrance, on a passive object, it is active remembrance on a,
on the supremely active object. You know. That is Krishna. So, therefore, you
know, actually, this remembrance can take on various forms. You know. Prabhupada
may sometimes be angry. He may sometimes be in great anxiety. You know. If some
devotees make some mistake in, you know, when the devotees wanted to, they were
supposed to inaugurate the temple in "Raman Reti", in Vrindavan at a particular
time. But they had not completed the work, only. And then, Prabhupada came to
Vrindavan for the inauguration of the temple. And Prabhupada said, the, the
temple, why? The temple was supposed to be the, simply construction site?
Prabhupada, what is this? How can you inaugurate the temple? Then, the devotees
just could not speak. And Prabhupada was furious. But then, that furiousne...,
that anger was not material. In that, he was remembering Krishna. And he was
thinking, oh, Krishna, I was going to offer you a temple. And this temple is not
ready. So, Prabhupada's, there was, the sadness was in Prabhupada's heart beause
of that. So, there was intense remembrance of Krishna. So, i..., even if there
is fury externally, that is based on internal remembrance of Krishna. Or
sometimes, it, Pra..., you know, that devotee may be in great anxiety. Or
something. You know. When Prabhupada had sent Tamala Krishna Maharaja to get
land for Mayapur. And he did not come for several days. And Prabhupada had given
him a lot of money to settle the deal. And Prabhupada was apprehensive. You
know. Did the land come or not? At night, he could not sleep. He could not do
his comm..., translation. And commenting. And when Tamala Krishna Maharaja came
late in the night. And Prabhupada immediately saw him. And said, yes, the land
is yours. And Prabhupada was really, it was very happy.

So, now, this is not a material emotion. It is all spiritual. Because it is all
for the service of Krishna. So, then, if that is the case, then how can we know
who is an advanced devotee? Well, it will, takes one to know one. We cannot know
precisely who is how advanced. But earlier, we discussed about non-imitable
characteristics. "avyartha-kālatvaṁ". You know. Then, "viraktir". Then,
"āśā-bandhaḥ". We see over there in those characteristics, he does not put
happiness as one of the characteristics. You know. "nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ" is
there. "samutkaṇṭhā" is there. "prītis tad-vasati-sthale" is there. That, you
know, constantly chanting the holy name of the Lord. Wanting to be in the holy
places. And, you know, eagerness to just connect with the Lord. All these are
there. But just "Ānanda" is not there as one of the characteristics because that
can be faked. Somebody can just put a plastic smile on the face. In fact, you
know, that is what in most offices, secretaries and sales people are trained to
put on a plastic smile on their face. So, you know, you know, somebody wants to,
somebody wants to just sell a toothpaste. You know. They will have a big smile
on their face. Where they will be showing their tooth. That is not a sign of
happiness. So, we cannot just depend on external symptoms. Of whether a person
is smiling or not. To indicate how, you know, how advanced stages. Or whether
that person is at the level of "premā". What we have to see is, how dedicated
that person is to the service of the Lord. And with those characteristic, we can
understand. And we see from those characteristic point of view, Prabhupada was
utterly dedicated to the service of Krishna. And it is by Srila Prabhupada's
mercy that we come to know about the exalted, you know, glor..., exaltedness of
bhakti. And the pathway to attain that exaltedness. So, this Bhakti Shastri
course which we have done is our service to Srila Prabhupada. You know. Srila
Prabhupada wrote all his books. And it was not just his books. He is giving us
the message of Krishna. As has been explained by many acharyas throughout the
history. And as Prabhupada has presented. So that it is relevant to all of us.
And, you know, you know, when we study it, we ar..., we are basically receiving
Srila Prabhupada's mercy. And letting that mercy enter into our heart. So, when
it goes through our head. And enters into our heart, it will enter deeper.
Because we will be intellectually convinced about what we are doing.

So, a quick recap of the journey that we have traced. We started our course with
"Īśopaniṣad". So, in "Īśopaniṣad", basically, the focus is on understanding the
inconceivable position of Ishvara. And how he is alone is the object of worship.
And in the, there are some indications of bhakti over there. Although, that is
not the focus of the "Īśopaniṣad". So, "Īśopaniṣad" basically, you know,
ultimately, if we want to look at spiritual life, or in any path, we need to
know sadhya. And sadhana. What is the goal? And what is the means? So, these
four books enable us to understand this sadhya. And sadhana systematically. So,
"Īśopaniṣad" points to the sadhya. It points that there is an Ishvara with whom,
we have to harmonise. And as, and we should not get distracted to material
progress. To demigod worship. To impersonal aspect. But we focus on the personal
form of the Absolute. And there are some, you know, there is some indication of
bhakti. The "premā" to that Absolute. Please remove. Please remove the
effulgence that is covering your real face. And please remove the obstacles.
Because of my past sense. Because of which I am not able to come close to You.
And please guide me back to You. So, there is an indication of bhakti over
there. And there is an indication that God is, that the Absolute Truth is
personal. You know. So, that was what? We discussed in "Īśopaniṣad".

Then, when we came to "Upadesamrta", what was the focus there? It was, ok, you
know, one, knowledge about, you know, God is not just theoretical. It has to be
transformational. So, what is it? What is the process for transformation? That
is bhakti-yoga. And how bhakti-yoga is to be practiced. That is the essence of
the discussion of the "Īśop...", Of the "Nectar", "Nectar of Instruction". So,
there, we discussed about how identifying who is a guru. What are the, and then,
based on the guru's guidance, we learn. Ok. There are things which are
favorable to bhakti. Which we should cultivate. Which are unfavorable to bhakti,
we should un..., we should not do. And then, the most important among the
elements is, you know, avoiding bad assocation. And more, and more positively,
having good association. And then, how to associate with devotees. The, you
know, six full loving exchanges. And how to associate with senior. Junior. Equal
devotees. Then, how to not have an offensive mentality while seeing devotees.
And then, we move forward. And how to practice bhakti. More and more deeply.
With the mood of Vraja. And ultimately, how to attain "Rādhākuṇḍa". Which is the
most exalted level of, you know, which is the arena of the practice of the most
exalted level of love. So, that was, so, through, you know, "Īśopaniṣad", we
understand Bhagavan. That the Ishvara is Bhagavan. He is personal. And then,
through "Nectar of Instruction", we understand how bhakti is to be practiced.

Then, in Bhagavad Gita, it is a huge, you know, you know, field that is
discussed. So, essentially, what happens in Bhagavad Gita is that the various
paths are discussed. So, karma-yoga is analysed, just compared to jnana-yoga.
In the first Six Chapters. And karma-yoga is declared to be superior. And then,
in the Eighth Chapter, the Sixth Chapter describes how karma-yoga through
dhyana-yoga will lead to bhakti. And then, in the middle Six Chapters, bhakti is
glorified. In the last Six Chapters, again, from jnana-yoga to bhakti-yoga is
described. How? So, the, what does the Bhagavad Gita do? Bhagavad Gita
establishes after comparing various paths. This kind of comparison has not been
done earlier books. Compares various paths. And establishes how bhakti is
supreme. And bhakti is the supreme sadhana. And the Bhagavad is the supreme
sadhya. So, the impersonal conception. The demigods. All these things are
analysed. And they are shown to be as subordinate realities. Now, after this has
been conclusively demonstrated, you know, that Bhagavan and bhakt..., bhakt...,
bhakt..., Bhagavan and bhakti are the supreme sadhya and sadhana.

Then, we want to know more about how to practice bhakti. And that has been the
discussion of "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu". So, in "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu", the
exaltedness of the bhakti is talked about in terms of the six characteristics of
pure devotional service. And then, how to practice bhakti is elaborately talked
about in 64 elements. And then, you know, if a traveler has to go on a long
journey. You know. Sometimes, if we have to go long, long journey. Then, maybe,
there are pictures. Of the destination. Which are shown. The summary has to go,
say, by earlier times, there were no planes. We have to go by ship. So, if we
have to travel for three months. And then, you show, there is some very
beautiful island. With beautiful scenery. And beaches. And very scenic
everything. Then, you see the pictures. Oh. This is so attractive. I want to go
there. No matter how much trouble is there, I will go there. So, like that, the
pathway is delineated. And then, when we look at "bhāva-bhakti" and
"premā-bhakti", as it described, that is, we are getting glimpses. Of how
ecstatic love is. And how we love for Krishna is. And those glimpses inspire us.
Yes. No matter how difficult, how forbidding this journey is, I want to go along
this journey. And Srila Prabhupada has given us the community of devotees as,
you know, our, you know, as our protection. As our motivator. And as our
facilit..., as our guide in moving onwards in this devo..., devotional journey.
And by Krishna's mercy. By Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's mercy. By Prabhupada's
mercy, you know, we will be able to go through this journey. And ultimately,
attain life's supreme perfection. So, thank all of you for joining us on this
journey of the Bhakti Shastri course. This is a small step forward. Which will
deepen our conviction and inspiration to accept the gift that Lord, Srila
Prabhupada has given us. And during these discussions, if by my harsh speech, I
have spoken anything which has hurt any devotees, I seek forgiveness for that.

        vāñchā-kalpatarubhyaś ca kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca
        patitānāḿ pāvanebhyo vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ

So, thank you very much. Srila Prabhupada ki jaya. Gaura Bhakta Vrinda ki jaya.
Srila Bhakti Shastri Bhakti Vrinda ki jaya. Thank you very much. Hare Krishna.
